Ben: Welcome to season 9 episode 2 of Acquired. The Podcast about great technology companies and the stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert and I'm a co-founder and managing director of Seattle based Pioneer Square Labs and our venture fund PSL Ventures.

David: And I'm David Rosenthal and I am an angel investor based in San Francisco.

Ben: And we are your host. Listeners, welcome to Andreessen Horowitz part two. We last left Marc and Ben instant messenger conversation in 2009 with the famous first words, “We have to start a venture capital firm and I was thinking the same thing.”

David: I think that conversation was actually 2008.

Ben: 2008, that makes more sense. Launched in 2009.

David: It takes a little while. We'll get into it. It takes a little while to set up a venture firm, raise the money.

Ben: You just don't snap your fingers and have $300 million?

David: Hahahaha.

Ben: Today, listeners, we will cover the next 11 years from the firm's founding to today. This is the story of the VC firm that basically changed everything in the whole landscape. Super high valuations, massive fund sizes, criticism for both of those things, becoming an investment firm and a media company, popularizing the message that former operators make better VC's than career investors do. David, reflecting back, it's pretty crazy that a16z is only 11–12 years old.

David: Wow.

Ben: Yeah, that became a big dominant force so quickly. To put it in perspective, they were founded two years after the iPhone came out.

David: That's right. Pretty good time to start a venture capital firm.

Ben: Perfect timing. Listeners, two things to highlight if you like the show. One is our Slack, and when I say Slack, I do indeed mean the company that a16z made $3-ish billion investing in.

David: Do you mean Tiny Speck?

Ben: Oh, sorry. I do mean Tiny Speck, you're right. We've got a great discussion of these episodes, crypto, investment ideas, all the good stuff with a community of 8000 super smart people like yourself. Join at acquired.fm/slack and the limited partner program. This is our members-only community where we drop special for-subscribers content.

The most recent one was with Kyle Samani who is the cofounder and managing director of Multicoin Capital. We talked with him about how to manage a crypto fund, how it's different than managing a normal fund on this show.

David: Very different. What was his line? Because they had a head fund and a venture fund all doing crypto. Well the demarcation is if time to liquidity is more than six, nine months or so, we put that into a venture fund. Oh, wow.

Ben: Yeah, a whole completely different universe. If you want to listen to that or any of the other LP show episodes or join us in our next upcoming Zoom calls with LPs, you can click the links in the show notes or go to acquired.fm/LP.

David: One last thing before we dive in. I would like to welcome once again our presenting sponsor for all of season nine, pilot.com. Pilot is the backbone of the modern financial stack for startups and is backed by all-star investors like Sequoia, Index, Bezos Expeditions, and Stripe. Not Andreessen Horowtiz yet, but life is long and a16z does have a pretty large growth fund now, so we shall see.

Pilot is truly the gold standard for startup bookkeeping. At this point, most (I think) if not all the companies I work with as an angel investor run on them. Now, over to our conversation with Pilot cofounders Waseem Daher and Jessica McKellar.

You talked last time about the importance as a startup of spending time on things that will actually make a difference in your outcomes. What was your experience with finance and accounting in your previous startups and how is the Pilot approach different?

Waseem: At our first startup case-wise, we started right out of school, we’ve all taken computer science. We knew nothing about anything, certainly nothing about running a company. We were bootstrapping the thing, so our dollars were scarce.

One consequence of that is we did all of our back office work. We bought double entry book keeping for dummies and a couple of ClickBook desktop. It was incredibly tedious and painful. I didn't really want to spend my time doing accounting and the time I was spending doing accounting was the time we weren't talking to customers, or improving the product, or hiring great people.

I think the experience we had was very visceral. Every startup founder needs to be laser-focused on what matters. Startups are super hard. You want to maximize your chance of success by really focusing it on the things that are really going to move the needle for the business. That visceral pain is really what caused us to start Pilot.

We said, why don't we build the service we wish existed? To be clear, that service is not ‘here’s a software package that helps you do your accounting.’ What you really want is ‘hello, I'm an expert who can take this work off your plate for you.’ That's what we set out to build.

David: Amazing. Our thanks to Pilot. You can learn more about them and whether they can help your company eliminate the pain of tax prep and book keeping by going to pilot.com/acquired and thanks to Waseem and Jessica. All Acquired listeners, if you use that link, will get 20% off your first six months of service. Super excited to have them with us all season. Thank you, Pilot.

Ben: Thank you, Pilot. Pretty sweet offer. Listeners, as usual the show is not investment advice. David and I certainly hold equity in some of the companies that we're going to talk about in the show so please do your own independent research. None of these is investment advice. It's for informational and entertainment purposes only.

David: One other disclaimer, disclosure, I do have a new investing vehicle that I am super excited about. It's called Kindergarten Ventures and it is an angel fund that I've started with my buddy, Nat Manning, who is the COO of Kettle, a great company that we talked about a bunch on this show. As I said last time, a few of the Andreessen Horowitz VPs are small LPs in the fund. I don't think that has had any influence on…

Ben: I’ve been keeping you honest.

David: Ben, you keep me honest here. I'm going to be pretty laudatory of Andreessen here, but I think I would have done that anyway, but you can keep me honest here.

Ben: David, congratulations. Excitingly, you are moving from angel to super angel in the 2008 parlance.

David: That's right.

Ben: Pretty cool.

David: Just like Ben and Marc, originally, it's not just about seed investing. Really, it’s about (in a large part) all the great folks in Acquired. We invest at any stage, any sector, we are super angels.

Ben: You're starting to spoil stuff, take us in. You're sounding exactly like one of the ten full VCs of the start of Andreessen Horowtiz.

David: Indeed. Let's see where Kindergarten goes over time. Okay, as you said at the top of the show, we finished last time with Ben Horowitz (not Ben Gilbert) getting off the obvious recruiting call from Doug Leone from Sequoia. He hangs up and he IMs Marc. IM, I love it.

You might be wondering, huh, why aren't they starting a company? Why are they starting a venture firm? Venture was something that, Marc at least, had supposedly been interested in back from his first early days in the Valley. He says to the wonderful writer, Tad Friend, in the great New Yorker piece that we're going to keep referencing today.

He says to him about venture capital, “I always thought the entire venture thing was incredibly cool. Going to Kleiner Perkins with the high ceilings, the markers on the wall of the great companies they IPOed, Larry Ellison walking through, and at 11:00 AM the biggest buffet you'd ever seen at a time I was eating at Subway, it was the closest thing to a Cathedral for nerds.”

That's some way to talk about the venture capital industry. As we talked about, Marc and Ben (of course) have been doing their super angel investing thing. This was an entirely huge leap, but as many, many people would point out to them and of course as they knew themselves, building a venture capital firm that is going to lead deals and beat out other venture capital firms to lead deals is a very, very different proposition than being an angel investor.

Ben: In this angel investing they were doing, we should say Marc and Ben did 36 deals together over just three years. A deal a month with their own money of about $200,000 of a max cheque size. They're pretty much leading rounds. They already don't have the dynamic of needing to be the one to set the terms and come in. That is about to hit them in a big way of a total difference between coming in as a participating versus a lead investor.

David: I'll say having now made the opposite journey. It is way easier and way more fun not to be a lead investor, but that's a whole nother story. But like we said, it's a pretty interesting and definitely contrarian time to start a venture firm. Here we are in late 2008, early 2009, of course what's going on? The financial crisis.

Most other VCs—if not VC, certainly the LPs—are all tucking their tails and triaging their portfolios right now. This is not about deploying more money or starting a new firm. Sequoia is just literally just on the RIP good times presentation. It's kind of crazy, though, to think that oh, we're going to go start a new firm right now.

Ben: Yeah, it's wild.

David: Here they are, obviously we talked about the big thesis that they have that there is no bubble. They're kind of all alone in shouting from the rooftops here that hey, things are actually great in Silicon Valley. This is not like the dot-com crash. The financial crisis is actually only going to be great for Silicon Valley startups, and of course, they are right about all of this.

Pretty much nobody else is saying this. Tad would write in the New Yorker piece later that a16z was designed from the beginning to be a full-throated argument about the future. Of course, at a time when nobody was making that argument.

They've got this insight. They've got the interest in VC and the drive to make it happen to go build a firm. They're Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz, but they're still just two dudes. If you want to pull off what they want to pull off, they're going to need a whole lot more than that.

They go to see, who else but their old friend Andy Rachleff. Andy, by this point, has stepped back from Benchmark and he's teaching at Stanford USB, and he's just made the jump to be an entrepreneur himself. He has founded Wealthfront. Of course knowing Andy, there is nothing that gets him more jazzed than the idea of, in the words of Howard Marks that he uses, “a correct non-consensus bet.” That is obviously exactly what Ben and Marc are trying to do here.

Andy tells them this is great. I love you guys and I love this contrarian bet that you're making, but you want to be in the upper echelon of VC firms and you need a strategy to break in. You see, we did this at Benchmark about 10 years ago when we started Benchmark and we've talked about this a lot on the show, but what we did in Benchmark was we counter-positioned against one of the two major incumbents at that time, which was Kleiner Perkins. Kleiner, as we talked about it, was the correct approach to venture capital.

Ben: All of our companies worked together in different ways as sort of a mesh network. We sort of sit in the network as the capital provider, but they work with each other in different ways.

David: Yup. On the one hand that was great, but on the other hand it's certainly that some of the Kleiner entrepreneurs felt like they were pressured into doing deals, working with other Kleiner portfolio companies that didn't really make sense for them. What Andy and Benchmark did is they said, there's no pressure from us to do anything else. We're going to treat you as sovereign states and help you make the best decisions for you. That was fun.

The second piece of the benchmark counter positioning against Kleiner—maybe this is the most important—the thing about Kleiner during its heyday was it really was John Doerr, and we got to do a whole episode on Kleiner and storied history even before John Doerr, but the glory days, it was all John. All their Bitcoins from Netscape to Amazon and beyond, it was John that sourced them and John was the reason why the entrepreneurs wanted to take Kleiner's money.

The thing about how it worked that wasn't talked about a lot, was John would source the deals. He would be the face of Kleiner, the reason everybody wanted to work with them, but then he'd farm out the board seats to other partners and even associates. How do you counter position against that?

Benchmark’s like this are great. We're going to be a small equal partnership. All the partners here are going to be great people you want on your board, you know what you're getting. Somebody from Benchmark you're getting an equivalent, maybe not quite an equivalent but they talked about an equivalent of John Doerr and your partner is actually going to sit on your board. If you're Benchmark, you need to start talking about how important it is to who your board member is.

Ben: Right. It's sort of this all about the individual. You form one trusted relationship, they aren't promising to do anything for you. We're not going to staff up your company or help you with PR. We're going to be the best financial investor and board member possible and you're going to have this really tight one-to-one relationship with someone that you really really want involved in your company, personally.

David: Totally. I think it's worth doubly underlining this because obviously it is super important who your board member is. The right advice from the right board member can make a huge difference. Today, we just take this for granted. It's like fish in water, yes, of course the board member that you have on your venture firm is super, super important. That wasn't the case and you could actually ask the question of is that the truth, period.

Ben: Totally. We're going to talk about a lot of things on this episode that Andreessen Horowitz introduced into common startup wisdom. This was the one that Benchmark introduced in the common startup wisdom.

David: Yup, and the reason they introduced this into startup wisdom was specifically to fight against Kleiner Parkins.

Ben: It was a strategy credit. It worked really well for them.

David: Exactly. Then of course the last piece of the benchmark counter positioning related to all of these now working on concert together was Kleiner was this huge firm. It's got a lot of tiers of parents, and lots of people there, lots of politics, lots of functions that are investing partners.

Benchmark is somewhere near the opposite. We're going to be a small, flat, equal partnership so we're all going to get onboard in a way that politics at a bigger firm like Kleiner would sometimes make it difficult.

Of course there's a lot of luck that goes into building a venture capital firm as well, and probably the most important thing for Benchmark was that they made that early investment in eBay. All of the strategy and all this counter positioning, sure, that helped, but they got eBay. Nothing else is going to matter after that, and that helped them ascend to the top of the venture capital heap.

Marc and Ben started doing all of this and hearing this from Andy, they're like, huh, okay, well what are we going to do? Remember, of course they love Andy but they hate Benchmark.

Ben: Yeah, and we should say the way that Benchmarks established these tenets that they hold true and the way that Andreessen Horowitz is about to, it's not pure marketing. At least from what I can tell in all the research. It is a self examination of what are the things we hold to be true and then what are the subset of those things that we can make a really loud marketing message about that we were going to do it anyway but played to a massive advantage for us.

David: Yup. They're like, we like this counterpositioning thing, Ben and Marc are. Who are we going to counterposition against? Not Kleiner and probably not Sequoia. Like we talked about in the last episode, if you're going to come at the king, you best not miss. That just seems really hard. Maybe we should counterposition against Benchmark?

Ben: Our buddy Andy is not there.

David: It's like the old saying, you either die a hero or you live long enough to see yourself become the villain, right?

Ben: Oh, on that note, I know you're about to talk about this later so I won't disclose how Marc announced the existence of the fund, but in the first sentence of the interview that he did announcing the fund, he literally said the sentence, “I'm crossing over into the darkside.”

David: That's actually great because I cut that from the quote that I was getting.

Ben: All right, perfect.

David: Perfect. Much later, Ben would just actually say point blank, “Yeah, we're always the anti Benchmark. Our design was not to do what they did.” Of course he's referring to them telling him that he wasn't CEO material but also in general we’re going to do the opposite of what they do.

Now the question becomes, okay, Marc and Ben know what they're going to do. They're going to counter position against Benchmark. How do they do that? The obvious first thing is we don't fire founders here and we support young technical founders, help them become the best CEOs that they can be, and we're not going to do what David Byrne tried to do to us.

Ben: I love the way they talked about this because clearly, it's something they deeply believe having both been computer science undergrads and gone on to become founders of companies. The way that they described it is without a synthetic network, without a network of what Andreessen Horowitz will become, a technical founder doesn't really have a chance of becoming a professional CEO.

The pace of the company's growth is going to require a CEO network, a CEO's understanding of how an organization is built much faster than someone can develop those skills. The thesis behind developing what would later become platform at the entire VC ecosystem platform teams was really Marc and Ben saying, how can we synthetically create or stimulate all the tools that a real professional CEO has if you are a technical founder, if you are the innovator, because their core belief they believe that the innovator should be the one who is running the company. If that is true, oh my gosh, there's all these problems that now we have to help them fix.

David: Totally. Now think about how this all fits back into these various VC firms’ strategies. What was Kleiner's strategy for overcoming this? It was the [...]. Great, we're going to take all of these founders, all these young companies, and how do we turbocharge them into being real companies, building their networks, and doing their deals? We have them work together. We have the best companies, so that's great.

Now think about the Benchmark strategy of where are you going to position against Kleiner? What do you need if you're the Benchmark strategy? You need CEOs who are grownups, who are capable of standing on their own, running their companies because they're not going to get a lot of support on that front from Benchmark because it's just the partners. Now it starts to explain some of the behaviors here over the past few decades.

Ben: You show me the incentives, I'll show you the behavior.

David: Exactly. They start thinking about this. They're like what are we going to do? Well, we want to raise a big fund. We want to be a big firm. We're going to have a lot of management fees associated with that and we, Marc and Ben, don't really need the management fee income streams. We've made plenty of money and we're used to being entrepreneurs, not VCs, not getting high ongoing salaries.

Ben: Lumpy cash flows.

David: Exactly. What if we take all these management fees and we staff up? We build a platform, Andreessen Horowitz. So 2.5% of $300 million is $7.5 million a year. That's a lot of money.

Ben: Right, and classically, when people say 2 and 20, it's 2% on average for the lifetime of the fund. You can say in the back half we're not going to be doing as much active work on this particular portfolio so we'll take 1.5%. At the front end we want to take 2.5% ot balance it out. Yeah, David, you're right. If we're not paying ourselves, which we should say for at least the first two years—Marc and Ben did not take a salary—we got a lot of cash we can spend on stuff.

David: Yeah, on people and resources. Then they start thinking about the rest of the venture industry. Marc and Ben's lenses as former entrepreneurs, if you got these firms that are small partnerships, not that many people, but they're just getting these huge management fee streams. It's kind of weird then that these VCs are telling entrepreneurs, oh, you should take $50,000 annual salaries, which was the norm back in those days, $50,000–$60,000 as annual salary and you should give us this big ownership, but we're going to make a few million a year each, rain or shine, out of these management fees. Interesting.

The next piece they start thinking about is how they can counter position. Benchmark, more so than pretty much any other venture firm even to this day—but a lot of venture firms felt the same way—they had the Series A purist approach. Really this idea that still permeates venture to this day, but the Series A, that's the real craft of venture. The board is related to this board member thing. That round is the sacred special round where the shoe leather really gets polished, so to speak.

Ben: To say why because in this very clear-cut world which we're not in now of these crazy names for rounds and incredible fluidity of rounds, there was not a seed asset class, there were no seed firms. So the Series A was your first professional venture capital institution coming in and writing a cheque into your company, taking a board seat—the first time you had real governance—and before that you have whatever cowboy would help you as an angel investor get to something that looked venture capital fundable.

David: If that even happened at all. In many cases, the Series A was the very beginning because you needed a few million dollars to go buy some servers and do all of that. By the time we're talking about here in 2008–2009, the Series A has really become this catbird seat from the venture capitalist because they can outsource all the real early-stage risk to the seed stage with way less capital—have these companies get going—and then once they start to show product/market fit and a lot of the risks has been removed, then the Series A venture firms can come in, lead around, and they're still all these hangover baggage with the round where it's like the norm that whoever leads your series A is going to get a huge ownership percentage in your company—25%–30% ownership—and it turns into this total bonanza for the venture firms who aren't really taking that much risk.

Marc and Ben are like, well, what if we say that Andreessen Horowitz will do any round at any time. We'll do seed. We'll do lots of seeds and we won't take board seats in the seed investment. You don't need that much capital, and we won't give you that much capital, and we won't take that much ownership. Then we'll do Series A, sure, but we'll also do Series B, and we'll also do growth rounds.

Ben: Listeners who are not professional venture capitalists listening to this, it sounds like okay, cool. They have a different strategy. They don't focus on a stage, they just focus on lots of stages. For anyone who has raised a fund before, you will know how insane this sounds. What venture capitalists classically pitch to LPs is our sweet spot investment is this. It is a company that looks like this. It's a stage that looks like this. It is an ownership percentage that looks like this. It's a cheque size that looks like this, and it's a set of governance rights that generally looks like this.

We intend to do that 20–40 times. That is how we will construct our portfolio, so therefore there can be a bunch of different variations among the companies as they go along. There will be winners, there will be losers, but they will start out like this so that's what you're buying. By starting a venture firm being like we're stage-agnostic, we're government-agnostic, it's like, wait, what's the thesis?

David: Totally. It seems crazy. Again, they look at the ecosystem and they're like wait a minute, there's super angels of which we've been them. We're doing great.

Ben: We're cleaning it up on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Zynga, I think.

David: Groupon. All these companies, where in them, we're doing great at seed. Why on earth will we stop that? Then they looked downstream past the Series A. There's a whole set of venture firms at this point in time that all they do is they just ride the coattails of Sequoia, Benchmark, and Kleiner and they say, what series did they do? Great, we're going to come in. We'll mark it up like 2X at the Series B. We'll ride along and they're doing great.

Andreessen Horowitz is like, we can blow these guys out of the water. Then they look across even further and they're like, whoa, there's this whole other asset class out there. I'm talking about Summit, TA, and Silver Lake which is going to come back up. Those guys, they're deploying a lot of capital. They're getting less multiple returns, but the dollar returns that they're generating are enormous right now.

Ben: In pretty short periods of time with very, very protected downside. Very low risk, low multiple, but fast return, big dollar amount investments.

David: Totally, and they don't even pretend to offer any of the stuff that venture firms pretend to offer, like huh, okay, great. This whole set of things, we're going to build a big firm, people-wise. We're going to use the management free resources to build out platforms to help technical founder CEOs become CEOs.

Ben: They would later call these networks. Each individual function, recruiting, finance, or acquiring enterprise customers, they call these networks at the firm.

David: Yup. We're going to do that. We're going to not necessarily focus solely on Series A. We'll do Series A, Series A is great, but we'll also do seeds. We'll also do growth rounds because we think there's opportunity there, and we can break in. Then government things, like sometimes we'll take board seats, sometimes we're not going to take board seats, but we don't necessarily need to, and maybe that will help us scale.

I would say all of that collectively becomes the counterposition against Benchmark. You know it works to varying degrees. On the whole it works great. There are a few specific things that don't work. The seed and the governance in particular, I think these are good ideas and they work now, but at that time, they started to inadvertently leave a pretty big flank exposed to old school VCs here which becomes the signaling effect.

Ben: This became talked about for 5–7 years after this was an issue.

David: Oh my God, people are still talking about these three or four years ago which is insane.

Ben: All right, so what is it, David?

David: If Ben and marketing will go out there and do all these seeds and not take board seats, the question then becomes if they don't invest in the next round in Series A or later, is that going to send a really negative signal to the market of, well, Andreessen Horowitz had the inside information on this company because they did the seed and now they're doing the A in the competitor. Does that mean the original company that they seeded is no good?

Other VCs in private and public vehemently attacked Andreessen Horowtiz on this front. The reality is the most exemplary cautionary tale about this is completely the opposite, and that is of course, Instagram which is so great. Andreessen, along with Baseline, does the seed in Instagram and then chooses at the Series A in one of the most boneheaded decisions of all time to instead back competitor PicPlz.

Ben: Right, because they ended up both being in their portfolio because Instagram started as Burbn, pivoted into Instagram, suddenly Andreessen Horowitz has a problem because they have two competing things in their portfolio. They're like, well, we got to pick one and we're picking PicPlz.

David: Totally. What actually happens here like, oh, you would think if you buy the narrative of the attack against Andreessen Horowitz, oh, signaling effect, Instagram, they're toast. Far from it, they raised a Series A from Benchmark, from Matt Cohler of Benchmark. Of course, we know what happens there and what happens to PicPlz, which is nothing exciting. The reality is the signaling effect works more against the VC firm than against the companies.

Ben: We've got this thing where the innovator should be running the company, Andreessen Horowitz is going to have all these networks that are going to augment that innovator, and give them CEO-like resources at their disposal. They can really be the professional CEO and the technologist who brought it into the world, they're going to spend a bunch of management fees to make this possible, they're gonna raise a pretty big fund for the time, $300 million. They're doing wacky stuff with portfolio construction.

David: Okay, all this is great. They've got this great theory, the grand unified theory of counter positioning and market entry strategy into the venture industry, blah-blah-blah, all good. But Andy's like us. This is one other thing, which is the reality on the field. I've done a bunch of research here since I joined the faculty at GSB. I've concluded, with data approved, what we all knew all along, which is that there's a very small finite set of companies that get started in the Valley, every year that actually matter.

It is a bloodsport to win the lead position as an investor in those companies. You're fighting against Benchmark, Sequoia, and Kleiner. You can counter position all you want, but you're going to go fight against John Doerr. You're going to go fight against Bill Gurley, and you're going to fight against Moritz and Leonie and all these guys. How are you going to win?

Just like the Mike Tyson quote, "You've got your plan, it's going to work until you get punched in the mouth," and they are going to punch you in the mouth. How are they going to punch you in the mouth? They're going to say things like, you know, yeah, Marc and Ben, Marc invented the browser and that's great and whatnot, but they haven't been VCs. They haven't been board members. They haven't been professionals here.

The other thing that they're going to say—and that's going to cut way deeper for you guys—is they're going to say that you guys don't have staying power. As Don Valentine would have said back in the day, obviously not about Marc and Ben, but he would have said, where are the monuments? What's Netscape? What's Opsware? You guys have built these good stories. Good companies, they're not around anymore.

Who's using Netscape? Nobody. You talk about this big game, but where's your eBay? Where's your Cisco? Where's your Oracle? Where's your Google? They aren't there. You want to work with us? We've got those monuments.

There's this great quote from the fortune cover story when they launch the firm. There's this quote in there that says, "Just five years ago, Andreessen's image was more that of a smart, amiable, billionaire playboy who dabbled ineffectually at technology's fringes. He seemed more like Paul Allen than Bill Gates." Then in the same piece, this is from the launch of Andreessen Horowitz. Think about it, who was placing these quotes?

There's a quote from Steve Case. Somebody didn't up Steve Case to like, do you have a quote here? “Marc is like a rock star who had his first album hit big and then the next ones were not quite the same.” Brutal. They're getting punched in the mouth, hard.

Ben: Those are brutal. You're implying then that in this punch-you-in-the-mouth landscape that's going on, the journalist is doing research for the story, and they just get connected with people who are going to, from day one right out of the gate, beat the crap out of Marc and Ben's accomplishments?

David: Yeah. I'm sure, Marc, Ben, and the great people they were working with on the PR side—which we'll get into in a sec—weren't the ones that pointed people to this quote.

Ben: The Steve Case thing is interesting, too, given that Marc reported to him for nine months as the CTO of AOL.

David: Totally. There's actually another sentence to the quote where it really softens the blow, something like, people have a lot of respect for him that he's persevered or something like that. The point, the damage is done here.

Ben: Yup.

David: They're like, we're going to have to deal with this. Fortunately, they know somebody who knows a thing or two about punching other people in the mouth. That is their other old board member from the Loudcloud, Opsware days. The original OG, Hollywood super agent Michael Ovitz. So great. We've talked a lot about Ovitz on this show, CAA and the whole Disney debacle, where he goes and becomes president of Disney. We of course talked about him joining the Loudcloud board after that on the last episode. I think if Andy was the inspiration for the highfalutin strategy of Andreessen Horowitz, Michael was the inspiration for like, okay, how are we going to get this done?

The quick story on Ovitz is he started in the late 60s in the mailroom of William Morris, the storied, long-term Hollywood talent agency, and everybody started in the mailroom back in the days. The dynamic in Hollywood was totally broken. We're talking here about how the venture and startup dynamics were a little broken at this time, like Hollywood was bad. The studios controlled everything. They held all the power, they held all the creative decisions. The talent and the artists, the actors, the directors, the writers, et cetera, they were but little more than indentured servants. The agencies like William Morris claim to represent the talent, but they knew who the real customers were, which were the studios.

Ben: I don't know if we've talked about it before on the show, but I've talked about it before with other folks in the Pioneer Square Labs context of how startup studios fit into the landscape. I love this equivalence between Hollywood and tech, especially in the old school days, you have the VCs, which are a lot like the studios. There were 3–5 major VC firms with money and there were 3–5 major studios with money that could greenlight a movie.

Then of course, you've got the CEO founder who's a lot like the director of a film, and then everyone else including the actors who works on the film is a lot like the team of the startup. Watching the way that the power dynamics evolve between these two ecosystems in parallel is really fascinating.

David: Totally. What Ovitz does, he and a bunch of buddies from William Morris, they're like, screw this, there's got to be a better way. They leave and they go start their own firm. It's exactly like Jerry Maguire. Jerry Maguire was actually about this guy, Leigh Steinberg in the sports agent world, but it's the same story. They leave, they're going to start a new firm, and they're going to focus on the talent, not the studios.

They're going to figure out how to deliver the power to the artists, and the talent, and take it away from the studios. How do they do that? One, they package projects and talent together, and then they sell whole packages to studios, and say, we'll sell the rights to you. By doing that, versus like, oh, we represent this actor and you studio, you're making this project. It's more like, no, we got the project and the artists own the project. We packaged it and we're going to bid these studios off against one another to finance it at the highest price.

How do they do that? They got to connect up the talent. They got to take the talent from being each individual person of their own to working together against the studios. How did they do that? They transformed what the firm from being each individual agent is a silo to we are a network. We're like a web network. They call it the franchise.

Anybody who's part of CAA, your job is to have your clients, but to get them to work with all the other clients at the firm that are represented by a shared Rolodex. To do that, everybody at CAA is a partner. No mailroom, no blah-blah-blah. We're all here, we're all together. This is about the franchise.

Ben: It's really fascinating in a business strategy context, zooming out what they did. This is a common discussion point on Stratechery of like, what is the point of integration within a value chain? What it used to be was at the studio level, because that's where the money would come from. They would get to aggregate all the resources together using their money, and the fact that it wasn't that competitive because there were very few people that they were competing against, and they knew them very well, and nobody wanted to lose their power. When you start having CAA say, actually, we're going to package all this together. The point of integration shifted down the value chain, one click to where now, it was happening with CAA.

David: Exactly.

Ben: The important thing here is, wherever the point of integration is, that's where you gain power. That's where you're able to become more than a commodity. Basically, you're able to create margin, where you're able to get more cash for something than it costs you to assemble it.

David: What did CAA do? They create the projects, like Jurassic Park, Lethal Weapon, Schindler's List. These are CAA projects. These are not studio projects. They pull them together and then they bid them out to the studio since now, all of a sudden, all these studios bidding against one another, the price goes way up, the dollars flowing into the space goes way up, and the artists all do way better, so Tom Cruise, Kevin Costner, Barbra Streisand, Steven Spielberg.

Within a couple of years, CAA's just vacuuming up everybody. Literally, the term that they used that I think Ovitz’ clients have become sad about CAA and Hollywood about all this, is they become, "the dream execution machine." You're an artist, you have a dream, CAA is your dream execution machine.

Ben: It's great marketing.

David: Oh, my God. Ben and Marc, they're like, oh, holy crap, this is so great. What better analogy to use we're going to go build the dream execution machine in startups.

Ben: Which happens to work particularly well because they're working with technical founders.

David: Exactly.

Ben: You have the glint of a dream and the ability to create the core piece of value, the core way a customer interacts within, and gets value out of the product. But you can't do all the other stuff. We are the dream execution machine, you should come to us.

David: Yup. They're just like a director, or a great actor, or a great writer, et cetera. The last unwritten, but it didn't need to be written principal at CAA was, take no prisoners and we're going to burn the old system to the ground. F all of those people. Of course, Ben and Marc have that same ethos about the venture ecosystem.

Ben: Whether theirs was written or not internally, it certainly became written externally in all of their communications. They pulled no punches in talking about how the entire existing, incumbent industry sucked and people were greedy; we'll pull some quotes later. They were not shy about being critical of the establishment.

David: Totally. This is the punch back in the mouth. Great, you're going to punch us in the mouth, say that we’re has-been rock stars who were one hit wonders? We're coming at you twice as hard. That's what they do. They also basically wholesale copy the firm building approach from CAA.

As you said, that platform and the networks that they build up, they hire a whole bunch of people. They have a biz dev network to connect founders with large company customers. They've got an executive recruiting network. They've got an engineer recruiting network. They've got future financings like other venture firms’ networks. And an M&A network associated with that, too. You need an acquirer, we'll hook you up with acquirers. Then of course, probably the most differentiated and important last piece of this is they have a PR network.

Ben: Yeah, which they wouldn't say is the most differentiated. The most differentiated, I think they would say, is the executive briefing center and our ability to galvanize a set of Fortune 500 companies to become your customers. In reality, yes, they are masterful at PR.

David: Ben would say this quote later, but here's the perfect spot for it. He would say, “Literally, we introduced a new concept to the field of VC, which was called marketing.” And it's true. No venture firms were doing this for themselves or helping their companies with PR and marketing before Andreessen Horowitz.

Ben: The interesting thing about why no venture firms were doing it about themselves was the commonly accepted wisdom that opacity plays to our advantage. I think most people didn't actually think it through. They just thought, what have successful venture capitalists done in the past and that was to be opaque, don't make too much PR noise other than to claim your win when you have it, but you don't need to take these big positions, be brash, and counter-position publicly.

Andreessen Horowitz not only saw that as a thing they could exploit, but I can't remember if it was Marc or Ben—I was listening out to a podcast that we'll link to in the show notes, along with a lot of other sources we did for research for this one—brought up the fact that if you trace back the origins of institutional firms like venture capital firms, it comes from the investment banks of the 40s and 50s, who were opaque because they were financing wars.

There were lots of reasons why they wouldn't talk about where their returns were coming from or their excitement about the projects they were financing. Whereas Marc and Ben are unabashedly optimistic about the future, Marc in particular, of just standing on the largest soapbox possible and preaching about how cool the future will be, and how much better off everyone will be both on average and in every spot in the distribution in the long run.

Let's bring that closer as fast as possible and be really loud about the future that we see, and about the companies that we're investing in to build it, how much we believe in that, and how unapologetic we are about that. That was just totally different from the commonly accepted wisdom of how venture capitalists should go to market.

David: Two things. One, I think the version of hiding the war financing of investment bankers that VCs were doing here was, they're hiding the management fees. Come on, you got a 10-person organization, half of which are assistants, and you're making $20 million across your funds in management fees a year. I don't want to shout that from the rooftops if I have a VC firm.

Ben: Or brag about how I'm putting $2 million into work to own 30%–40% of a company.

David: Exactly. Then the other thing, though, the flip side is, if you are going to be unabashed about pounding the table about what you're doing in the future, if you're an entrepreneur, you think you're part of building that future, God, now you've got a champion. This is great.

Ben: Yup.

David: There's one other person along these lines that they go see before launching the firm, which is the number one, hands down, best PR person in Silicon Valley at the time, Margit Wennmachers at the OutCast PR Agency. Margit had co-founded OutCast and they had all the best clients—Facebook, Salesforce, VMware. They worked with them from the time they were nobodies still up through being huge companies. Amazon, they did the Kindle launch and may to this day still work with the Kindle team.

The story of how they get connected is—Margit tells this on an a16z podcast episode—that one of the companies that Marc and Ben had been angels in, wanted to work with OutCast, but Facebook blocked it and said it was a conflict and wouldn't let OutCast work with them. Marc had just joined the board of Facebook and he gets involved in trying to smooth this all over. He's like, wow, Margit is really amazing. I see a Facebook, like what she's doing there.

He gins up an excuse to get her contact info, calls her up supposedly to talk about this situation, and instead brings her to the Creamery in Palo Alto, sits down with Ben and they just talk the whole time about how they're going to launch a venture capital firm. I've got another project for you, which is great. Marc is like, okay, we work with venture capital firms, I can do this. What are you going to call the firm? They're like, we're going to name it Andreessen Horowitz. She's like, that is a terrible idea.

You're talking about this big game about how you're going to be a franchise, you're not going to be about the partners, it's all about the entrepreneurs and network, and you're literally going to put your own names on the door. Are you serious? They're like, no, no, no, no, it's not what you think. We did a whole big branding exercise about this. We heard a big branding firm, we did all this work, and we decided we need to do this for two reasons.

One, Marc Andreessen is a known quantity. He invented the Mosaic browser.

Ben: He’s already a brand.

David: He's already a brand. We can draft off of that to get going and then once we get going, we transition from Andreessen Horowitz to a16z, which is a to z. Supposedly, the story, I guess, it's probably true that people used to abbreviate internationalization to—

Ben: Oh, I actually know. It's definitely true. My first job when I was 14, was as a product test engineer at this medical printer company in Cleveland.

David: I did not know that. That's awesome. We're learning some Ben Gilbert history.

Ben: Yeah, and I did some internationalization work, which you will need to type that once before you're like, well, I never want to type that word again. That is abbreviated i18n.

David: People really do this?

Ben: Absolutely. There's another one. I think it's localization, might be L16n or L11n. I can't remember how many letters but yeah.

David: Interesting. They're like, well, it's perfect. It's a geeky reference.

Ben: Super esoteric.

David: Super esoteric, but it's a to z. We're going to do a to z. At Andreessen Horowitz, we'll do any round, a to z. This is great.

Ben: By the way, you'll get a heads up that Marc and Ben are going to step back from the firm when they actually, formally changed the name to a16z. I was looking for it in this most recent visual refresh that they did. I'm like, oh, is it time? Are they actually flipping it to a16z? But nope. The official logo as you'll see on the art for this episode is still Andreessen Horowitz.

David: Still Andreessen Horowitz, interesting. It's got to become… all across the website everywhere. All the media they do, it's a16z. It's not Andreessen Horowitz.

Ben: Yeah, but still the unofficial moniker.

David: Still there, baby. There's one other thing, one other benefit about the name which we know very, very well at Acquired. They're going to be listed first in the phonebook.

Ben: Yup, huge advantage.

David: It literally is a huge advantage. Anytime that a reporter's writing a piece about them talking about various venture capital firms, as much as not, they're just going to alphabetize stuff, and who's going to come first? Andreessen Horowitz is gonna come first.

Ben: We happen to be just very lucky that podcast clients are not terribly sophisticated in how they do sorting. Whenever you subscribe to the show, it just displays them in alphabetical order.

David: Totally. Marc is like, yeah, all right, whatever, fine. All right, you guys have done a lot of justification to put your names on the door.

Ben: Rationalize, rationalize, rationalize, great.

David: Yup. What you need is you need to build up hype and you need a cover story. What do you want to do? What outlets do you want to go on? Where's your cover story? I can get you whatever you want. What do you want to do? So in February of 2009, Marc goes on Charlie Rose.

Ben: Even 15 years later, it holds up really well.

David: Yeah, it was really good. Landing Marc on the show when there's no reason; it's not like he has a new company or anything.

Ben: In fact, the funniest thing is that I tweeted this from the Acquired account last night. There's some point where it brings up the little title tag underneath and it says Marc Andreessen, I think its founder, Ning. Founder of Ning? It was true at the time, but did anyone care about Ning? Not really.

David: That's the best he can come up with?

Ben: Yeah. We should be clear. He is on the board of Facebook. He's involved in some stuff that's going crazy. He's an investor in Twitter and Twitter's in its third month of vertical line growth. He's not just the Netscape guy. He's involved in something that these companies that are part of a cultural phenomena at the moment.

David: Totally. Still, it was a pretty big win for OutCast to get him on the show. Charlie starts off and says, when we interview people like you, we always have to ask the question, what's the hottest idea there in Silicon Valley? What's the next big idea? Marc replies, well, maybe this goes off track from your question—he's great at redirecting; he's obviously had some training—I think the hottest idea is that innovation is actually alive and well. Remember, this is February, 2009. But look, there are a lot of people out there who are arguing the other side of that. He's already setting up like, we are the champions of innovation. Only we can save you. Then Charlie asked him about rumors he's been hearing that Marc is starting a venture capital firm.

Ben: It's like rumors he's been hearing. This is why he's on the show. It's generous of you to give him...

David: Rumors he's been hearing from Margit that you're starting a venture capital firm.

Ben: You have to realize, before you finish, I think it is worth planting the seed. I watched this interview because I was reading an article and I was like, oh, this article says that he announced it on the show. I should go watch the Charlie Rose interview where he announces it. I start watching it and I get 20 minutes in and like, this isn't about Andreessen Horowitz.

Then I remembered exactly what you opened with, obviously, it wasn't a brand yet. He wasn't known for being an investor yet. If you're making the pitch to Charlie Rose, if you need to have this guy on the show, Charlie's throwing Marc a bone by letting him mention his new project to galvanize it on this show. Of course, it only occupies 3 minutes of a 50-minute interview.

David: Marc replies with, as he said at the top of the show, yes, I'm going to the dark side. Then he says, so I'm creating a fund and as you know, our claim to fame is we've actually been entrepreneurs. We're by entrepreneurs, for entrepreneurs. We've done it. We've been on that side of the table for a long time. We know what it's like.

Ben: Yet another way, they're counter positioning. It's like, oh, my gosh. These professional investors out there, you don't want to work with them. You want to work with us because we've been in your shoes, which is now the dominant dogma that VCs feed to founders and then just uncommon.

David: You heard it here first on Charlie Rose.

Ben: Yeah.

David: It's actually really funny. Did you get to the part later in the episode where they're talking about various new seed stage companies in Silicon Valley, and Mark starts talking about this really interesting guy who's starting a company and he's proven demand for it?

Ben: Yes. He describes what we do at PSL, the validation process of driving traffic, and having a brand, and testing conversions.

David: He just built a landing page. There's no product. Did you get to the part where he says who it is?

Ben: Yes, it's Andrew Chen, who would become his partner 10 years later.

David: So great. He's like trying to remember, oh, what was that guy's name?

Ben: Right. He pitched me on this thing. I think he's getting close to having it around. It's coming together, good for him. Of course, this is pre-Uber. Andrew hadn't even done the growth thing at Uber yet.

David: So great. These artifacts are history. I just love them.

Ben: It's like when Don Valentine holds up the resume and it turns out to be Alfred Lin's. It's that kind of reference.

David: It's one of those moments, totally. The actual big cover story reveal, as we said, July, 2009, cover story of Fortune Magazine, Marc is, I think not barefoot in this one on a throne. I actually didn't see what the image was. I'd be very curious.

Ben: I'll look it up while you talk.

David: They announced Andreessen Horowitz, a $300 million fund, which was very large at the time, especially for a first time fund. The piece starts off with the old Netscape email story that we told last time about Ben emailing Marc about the launch back at Netscape and Marc replying like, next time, do the effing interview yourself, F you. Then this is where the quote from Marc of, "this is why I should not run another company that comes up", which of course, this is the perfect. Oh, yes, we're starting a venture capital firm because I shouldn't run another company. Hahaha. Perfect.

Ben: So, the cover image is this pretty hokey Uncle Sam gag where it's Marc pointing at the camera and it says, I want you to get the future.

David: Oh, my God, that's so great. I want you to get the future. So prescient, given that the future would be the future for them. That's awesome. Okay, a couple quotes later in the article. First quote, “Entrepreneurs are sure to be attracted to Andreessen,” drafting off the Andreessen brand here, “who expresses more kinship with founders than with his peers in the finance world.”

One blog post that Marc has written, titled, The truth about venture capitalists raised the question: VCs: soulless and rapacious capitalists, or surprisingly generous philanthropists? Two guesses which side of the coin he comes down on in that piece, talking about punching back in the mouth.

Ben: It's like, how could you even have listed the second one? Of course, it's not the second one.

David: Yeah.

Ben: Has anyone in John Doerr's life or Don Valentine's life ever accused them of being merely a philanthropist? No, come on. It's the readers of fortune, too.

David: They do some great philanthropy, but...

Ben: For sure, but not through Sequoia and Kleiner Perkins.

David: No, definitely not.

Ben: It's a value created for the world. Clearly, I believe that I wouldn't be in this line of work, and you, and us doing the show, and everyone listening, but it's not philanthropy.

David: It's just so easy for Marc to set up these straw men here, but the punches are flying in this article. We've already alluded to this a little bit. Later in the piece, another quote, "The Andreessen Horowitz strategy of investing in a menagerie of startups could pose hazards." Here's a direct quote in the article. "If I were one of those guys whose company stumbles, will they,” they being Marc and Ben, “be there to help me, or will they have time?" says Paul Holland, general partner at Foundation Capital, a Silicon Valley venture firm. "Where the pain part of it comes in is when you get up to those 60 or 70 investments. It will be an interesting chore to keep track of all that." Bad idea to go on the record here, Paul.

Ben: Everyone's just finding a way to talk to their own book. Whatever my strategy is, is superior because XYZ, whatever they're doing is stupid because of XYZ.

David: Totally. It lands with a big splash. They're in business, they got this $300 million fund, it's December 2009. I think, according to PitchBook, the very first check they wrote is actually a very small check early. I think they hadn't even done a final close on the fund into, do you know the company, Ben?

Ben: Is it Seattle-based?

David: It's not a Seattle-based company. This is a very small check that they wrote.

Ben: No.

David: Into a larger round, a Series C that is led by somebody else of a then—this is at the end of 2008; it must have been just like a first close on the fund, like a warehouse investment or something like that—very, very hot company, end of 2008 in Silicon Valley. Not Facebook, not Twitter, another social media company.

Ben: LinkedIn?

David: Nope. Digg, digg.com.

Ben: Digg. I thought that was a personal investment.

David: I think it was but I think they managed to get a little bit of fund money into their Series C.

Ben: Fascinating. I was obsessed with Digg.

David: So great. Kevin Rose, amazing.

Ben: In the Reddit versus Digg war, I was so team Digg. It has better design that makes more sense. I watched Diggnation. I think every episode of Diggnation, I was all in.

David: So great, me too. It was the best. That was the first. Then the first real actual large check round that they lead is a Seattle company, Apptio.

Ben: Apptio. While doing research for this episode, I was on a bike ride and I rode past the Apptio building. I was listening to some podcast interviews with Marc and Ben, and I took a selfie and sent it to David. I was like, doing research.

David: The irony is, I was going to a Giants game in San Francisco right at the same time. When I get out of the Uber, a block away from the Giants stadium, I get out right in front of Andreessen Horowitz's new San Francisco office building with the big sign up front. I didn't notice if it was a16z or Andreessen Horowitz. I think it was Andreessen Horowitz.

Ben: It's Andreessen Horowitz. You know if they're putting it on the sign that the intention is for it to stay around for at least a few more years. The Apptio investment, it's a co-investment with both of our former employer, Madrona.

David: Yup, and Greylock, I think, too.

Ben: Yeah. I think they had worked with Sonny in the past, the founder at, was it at Loudcloud?

David: I think Sonny's previous company had been acquired into Loudcloud.

Ben: But that was really emblematic of part of what the thesis was at that point is, we've worked with these amazing people over the course of our careers, we're going to be a network-driven firm. They didn't have the firepower yet to be a thesis-driven firm. Now they're extremely thesis-driven. At that point, it was like, oh, this guy's an entrepreneur and starting a company or it was, I think, already a company in flight. Absolutely, we should invest in it. We know it very well. It's a great employee.

David: Totally. One of their other first checks.

Ben: Speaking of stage-agnostic.

David: Speaking of that same, we're going to invest in Opsware, Loudcloud, or Diaspora. Great, great indeed, truly great people. I think this is one of their first 5 or 10 investments, Rockmelt. Our boy, a great friend of the show.

Ben: Eric Vishria.

David: Former Opsware, VP of marketing, future Benchmark capital, general partner, Eric Vishria.

Ben: Pretty cool.

David: It's so funny that they led this around. Benchmark, I don't think was an investor in Rockmelt.

Ben: The other funny thing about that is that it was supposed to be a next-generation web browser. Obviously, Marc knows a thing or two about web browsers, and Rockmelt was like, what if the browser had built in social characteristics and could bring in your newsfeed, Twitter, and all this stuff right into the browser? It was like a sweet spot investment for Marc and Ben, having worked directly with Eric, and then also Marc saying that seems plausible.

David: Totally. It was a great idea. I remember using it. I thought the browser was great. It was built on Chromium. In many ways, it was Brave too early and before crypto was a thing.

Ben: Yeah. Do you know what I was referring to, speaking of stage-agnostic?

David: You're talking about their $50 million investment in September, 2009?

Ben: In the first year of operations of the fund out of a $300 million fund.

David: It's going to put 1/6 of it.

Ben: $50 million into one company that ended up looking genius, but boy did this cause a lot of kerfuffle and criticism when they did it.

David: Boy, did it ever. September 2009, $50 million deployed alongside Silver Lake.

Ben: The private equity firm, Silver Lake.

David: Tech private equity firm, Silver Lake, who I believe the Silver Lake headquarters are in the same Rosewood office park on Sand Hill Road that Andreessen headquarters are in. Maybe they talked about it at lunch at the Rosewood one day. We haven't talked about the headquarters literally in the Rosewood complex on Sand Hill. It can't get any better than that. So yeah, $50 million into the spin out of Skype from eBay.

The whole transaction is a $2 billion purchase of 65% of Skype from eBay. Worked out pretty well, but they probably should have spun out PayPal instead of Skype. That would have been a lot better.

Ben: They did eventually, but both of them ended up being really fantastic ideas. Both of them created a lot more value independently.

David: Andreessen Horowitz wasn't part of the PayPal spun out.

Ben: Early stage investors often talk about how there's a minimum ownership percentage that they need to hit in order for it to be meaningful for the fund return, which is true if you're only deploying a very small percentage of your fund. But this is a case where they used $50 million to buy 1.8% of Skype.

On the one hand, you're like, oh man, that 1.8%, gosh, we need to own a lot more for this to be meaningful for our fund. However, since you were putting 50 million to work, that even if you got like a 2X on that, which is not great by venture standards for a normal early stage investment, but that really is meaningful toward helping to return the fund.

David: They ended up getting a 4X on it?

Ben: A 3X. And it was quick. It was just a year-and-a-half, it ended up turning into $153 million for them.

David: A couple of things on this. One, Marc, then be back to like, okay, what are we going to do here at Andreessen? This is going to become a case study. He helps broker a Facebook partnership for Skype, which I remember this. Remember when Facebook integrated Skype for video calling?

Ben: In Messenger.

David: Yeah, man, huge. Could you imagine something like that happening today? No effing way. That was all Marc. And then he helps recruit Tony Bates to come in as the CEO. Tony from Cisco was a rising star there.

Then in a later fortune piece that Margit would place another great one, talking about the deal, "The clincher was Bates's meeting with Andreessen. I'd always been a big admirer, but never met him." Bate says of Andreessen. "Going into the Andreessen Horowitz office was an experience. They have this wonderful library in the lobby, and I looked for a couple books that were special to me. One was Neuromancer by William Gibson. I couldn't find it, so that became a good opening to the conversation."

Ben: I think it's Marc's personal library, the library in the lobby.

David: You can just see the whole mystique, the firm, the franchise, all of this being woven together here and it's happening in public, in Fortune Magazine.

Ben: In the press.

David: So great.

Ben: Yeah. There's another great little end of this story, which is, there's a blog post where Ben Horowitz said that the Skype deal generated a tremendous amount of controversy for us. That controversy ended this morning. Of course, this is when the deal gets done.

David: What was it? $9.5 billion that Microsoft acquired it for?

Ben: I think $8.5 billion, somewhere in that neighborhood.

David: $8.5 billion, that's right. Still pretty, pretty nice, quick return. Unfortunately, shortly after this, right around this time, I keep saying the biggest mistake in the firm's life, but the reality is Instagram only got acquired for a billion dollars. There are two mistakes. One, Andreessen screws up, not continuing to invest in Instagram. Two, Instagram sells to Facebook for a billion dollars.

Ben: Versus $200 billion, $500 billion, some massive company inside of Facebook that it is today.

David: Totally. So sad. That was March, 2010. Fortunately, though, also in early 2010, they made a great decision.

Ben: Wait, I just have to pause for one quick second and say Instagram was definitely not their biggest miss ever there. Their biggest miss ever is definitely Uber.

David: That's coming. Don't worry.

Ben: Okay.

David: You're right. Not the biggest miss for Andreessen, but Silicon Valley's biggest miss to the past 15 years was Instagram being sold to Facebook.

Ben: Accrued to Facebook shareholders, but not the rest of the venture ecosystem.

David: Totally. That's a whole another rabbit hole that we've been down many times. A great decision that they made in early 2010 is they lead the Series A of Okta, the identity company, which they would then own 18% at IPO, I think?

Ben: Yup. They owned just a hair under 20%, pre-money at the IPO before the IPO cash came in.

David: That IPO valuation was $6 billion. Is that right?

Ben: $6 billion and today, it's $33 billion? That company's continued to just be a monster.

David: Yeah. This is out of a $300 million fund. At IPO, their stake was worth...

Ben: Call it $1.5–$2 billion at IPO.

David: At IPO on this one company. If they've held to today...

Ben: Which it's unlikely, given it was a fund one for them.

David: Totally, and I'm sure they distributed over time. They probably captured some of this upside, but just as a thought exercise, 15%, that’s $5 billion-ish? Not bad.

Ben: Okta, this is another one that Marc talks about publicly, as we were totally laughed at. Identity providers were a thing already and Microsoft with Active Directory like it was owned, but the CEO of Okta, Todd McKinnon had this big thesis around the shift to the cloud, which means that there's time for a new identity provider. There's room for a new person to come in and now the incumbents are going to be able to react to it.

Marc always talks about that like, this is the kind of thing that we love hearing when there's a rearranging of the technology paradigms that are used. Right now it's just by a small select set of people, but over time, everyone will shift to the cloud. He said they were totally laughed at for doing the Okta deal because it was very against collective wisdom that that would be successful.

David: Two things. One, it even goes deeper than that because Tim Howes, who was an early Netscape guy and then a co-founder of Loudcloud with Ben, Marc, In Sik Rhee, and everybody, he invented LDAP, the Directory Access Protocol. They knew a lot about this. The other thing, just everything you said reminds me of the classic Sequoia question, the why now, why was it great? Why now for Okta? The cloud was changing everything.

Ben: There were a lot of companies around this time and even for the next five years where just saying, hey, we're going to do a thing that's already a settled frontier and a very settled frontier in the On Premise world, but we're going to bet big on cloud, and we're going to architect it in such a way that we're not even compatible with the On Premise world. If they miss-time the enterprise shift to cloud, the whole thing would have gone under because there would have been no way to be, I'm thinking specifically of like a Snowflake, the cloud-based data warehouse. You had to be binary in your bet and say, we believe in this thesis at this timing. Obviously, with Okta and Snowflake, it paid off, but with other cloud bets like Loudcloud, it did not.

David: The why now was not great. Actually, it was great. It was a good story, it just didn't play out well. They're spending money. Let's see, maybe their VC enemies would say drunken sailors. Maybe it would be a good term at this point. We're in the early parts of 2010. They've done $50 million into Skype, they've done all of these deals, they're doing tons of seed deals on top of it. It's a lot, they're almost out of cash and they're reserving half the fund for follow on, so they only have $150 million of new money to deploy. They're like, we got to go raise another front.

This actually just came out recently. I saw this in, I forget which publication this was in, but a quote recently that Ben said, this is a quote, "Horowitz said in a recent Clubhouse interview, that when the duo were raising their first investment fund of $300 million,” a big sum for a VC firm at the time, indeed, “Andreessen told him they needed to raise a second much bigger fund right away. In fundraising and in venture capital, strength leads to strength." Andreessen said, according to Horowitz.

Ben: It's so true. It's such a good point.

David: Oh, boy. Strength leads to strength. It's so true. It's so funny and it's so true.

Ben: Have you read the Michael Mauboussin paper on persistent differential returns by asset class?

David: I have.

Ben: We'll put a link in the sources. For those who haven't read it, there's all this data to support the fact that you look on one side of the spectrum on hedge fund managers, and if you're the top performing hedge fund manager this year, it has almost no bearing on whether you will be a top performer five years from now, maybe not even one year from now. But if you look all the way on the other side of the spectrum at venture capital, and because he's a good academic, he doesn't presume to state the cause, he just states that there is a correlation, that the top performing firms stay the top performing firms for a long time.

If you're the top performing venture investor this year, it's very likely that you will be 10 years from now. We're at least one of the top performing ones. The postulate is that, well, strength follows strength, that when you do the best deals, you then start to realize the flywheel of getting the best entrepreneurs that are referred to you.

David: Totally. This is everything that we spent the last hour-and-a-half talking about of like how are Marc and Ben going to break into this dynamic? I remember, I think I've maybe talked about this on an episode in the past. Back when I was an even younger whippersnapper, just starting out in VC at Madrona, I got a chance to get drinks with Bill Gurley once. I was so eager, like all my questions were prepared.

I had a notebook and the biggest one I wanted to ask him is like, Bill, tell me the secret. What is the secret to success in venture capital? He looked at me and he was like, David, the secret to success in venture capital is success in venture capital. It's so true. You have success and that gets you more success. You don't have success, good luck.

Ben: To Marc's point here, it also is true in startups. If you are massively outraising everyone else in your category, you're going to be able to kind of keep that mindshare of the category leader, you're going to be able to recruit the best executives, you're going to be able to land those customers. There is this, on the one hand it's hype, and on the other hand, a hype is a self-fulfilling prophecy in a lot of ways.

David: Totally true. What a great encapsulation of startups and everything. It is hype, but it's also real. Anyway, they go out in December, 2010 and they raised a second fund in one year. After deploying an RD large $300 million fund, they raised a $650 million second fund in 2010.

This was nuts. This was like an atom bomb going off in the industry. Two reasons, A, that is so much money. When I was at Madrona at the time, we were investing out of a $250 million fund and we were a 20-year old firm.

Ben: It's still pretty close after the financial crisis.

David: Yeah, I mean, 2010. The pace, the idea that you would "blow" $300 million worth of a fund in one year and be back a year later to your LPs to go raise another fund, this was crazy. The established VC firms, they're still coming off the hangover from the dot-com bust, where they stretched their 99 funds for 4, 5, 6 years. We did that special with Altos talking about how they had to stretch a fund 6, 7, 8 years before they could raise their next one.

This is just wild, what's happening here. The press eats it all up.

The other thing that raising now having almost a billion dollars in capital under management gives them is even more management fees to go out and recruit more people. This is when they go back to Margit, who's been just doing a bang up job for them on PR.

Ben: Which we should say, when you say a lot, this is $16 million of new fees coming in every year or about $15 million, you got a budget.

David: Wow. You got a budget. How about you leave OutCast and join Andreessen Horowitz full time? This wasn't totally crazy because she had already sold OutCast to a holding company. She had co-founded it, but it had been sold, and they just brought in a separate CEO. She comes and full-time joins as head of marketing for Andreessen. No venture firm had a head of marketing before this.

They also bring on Jeff Stump to run talent. They bring on John O'Farrell, who was head of biz dev, I think, at Opsware as a GP. Interestingly, he had not obviously been a CEO, despite the mantra of, we only have CEOs as GPs here. Anyway, it works out well. What did they do? They've had the strength, they now have more strength. They keep the foot on the gas, they keep deploying the money quickly.

Early 2011, this is crazy and totally works out great for them, but gets pilloried in the industry at the time, they take all this money. They start going and buying private secondary shares in pre-IPO companies like Facebook, Twitter, and Groupon. I don't know how well Groupon worked out for them, but they deploy I think over $80 million into buying pre-IPO secondaries in these companies.

Ben: Wild, which they probably were investing exactly the upper limit of each fund in secondaries because they weren't a registered investment advisor yet. They were just a regular venture firm.

David: Yup, that makes sense.

Ben: Which is 20% per firm. It's what you can do into...

David: Yup, 20% per fund. So 20% of $650 million would have been like $120–$130 million. I bet they did.

Ben: It's like up to that, give themselves a little breathing room, that's how you come up with the $80 million.

David: Yup. It may have been more than $80 million too. That may have been just Facebook anyway. Then in April of 2011, they led a hotly-contested Series B for a little gaming company making a game called Glitch, the name of Tiny Speck. Marc had invested in the seed for Tiny Speck personally and then in the previous fund, Andreessen Horowitz had put a little bit in in the A that Excel had led. Of course, the CEO of Tiny Speck is Stewart Butterfield.

Ben: Stewart Butterfield, I know that name.

David: Very shortly after, I believe, Andreessen leads this round, the Series B. Stewart sends an email to the board. "I did not feel that we are pouring gas on a fire here, more like pouring good whiskey on a drugstore heating pad. It is unlikely to burst into flames." And he means that bursting into flames being good for the company, not bursting into flames being quite bad for this new Andreessen Horowitz investment.

Ben: I loved his honesty. It's great.

David: Yeah, just keeping it real. They all figured out as board and I think Marc's involved in all this. All right, well, what else are we gonna do? We don't necessarily want the money back.

Ben: There's a lot of negative things about serial or repeat entrepreneurs that get a lot of criticism, like it's not their life's work, they've already made their money. There's a lot of reasons to be a little bit careful. This is one way where it massively plays to the company's advantage that Stewart from Flickr knew what bursting into flames felt like. You could call it escape velocity, you could call it getting real traction, or product/market fit. Whatever it is, Stewart knew what that felt like, much like Marc did from his Netscape experience. This wasn't it.

David: It's not it. No, it was not. Of course, they pivot into this little front end that they'd built on IRC.

Ben: IRC. It was extensions on top of IRC.

David: Extensions on IRC for workplace communication that they were using internally. Decided to call it Slack. They called up our friends, Andrew and the crew at MetaLab. Andrew, now of course at Tiny Capital, got MetaLab to design the UI, take it to market as a product called Slack. Works out pretty well for everybody involved.

Ben: That it did. I threw out that $3 billion number earlier. A lot of these exit numbers are estimated. It's not like we actually know Andreessen Horowitz's returns, but we can back into it based on what we think they own from participating in various rounds, or what they owned at IPO, and when we think they may have liquidated. Assuming that they held it from IPO to the 18 months afterwards till the Salesforce transaction, it would have been about a $3 billion outcome. Very good decision for Andreessen Horowitz to let Stewart keep running with the money even though the game was not bursting into flames.

David: That's a good couple of multiples on that. A huge $650 million fund, too. How would they ever return that? Oh, boy.

Ben: When you say, how would they ever return that, that's because that was the knock on Andreessen Horowitz at the time. That was their narrative. It was like, these guys, this huge fund, there's no way.

David: $650 million venture fund. Can anybody return that amount of capital, let alone these new guys? So 2011—oh, boy, what a schizophrenic year—here are some of the investments that they made in 2011. Do you remember ShoeDazzle?

Ben: I do.

David: Yup. ShoeDazzle. Jawbone, how about that one?

Ben: Yeah. Boy, everyone lost money on that.

David: Oh, boy. It grew as a great quote from Marc. I forget where, maybe it was in the New Yorker piece, saying that Jawbone is the new Sony.

Ben: It's such an unbelievable cool technology innovation that just...

David: Yeah. Lytro camera, remember that one?

Ben: Yeah.

David: How about this one? fab.com.

Ben: Jason Goldberg?

David: Yeah. Oh, boy. That was a flameout, unfortunately.

Ben: There were a lot of other big name folks. Speaking of Digg, Kevin Rose was involved in that one, too.

David: In Fab, was he?

Ben: Yeah. I bought some stuff on Fab. They had really unique merchandise.

David: I did, too. It was cool, but man, burned through a lot of money. It doesn't matter. Also in 2011, they bring on a few new general partners, I think, but one in particular, Jeff Jordan. Boom, wow. Jeff, I believe, started his career in the famous Disney strat planning group. I think he worked for Meg Whitman there.

Ben: I didn't realize. That's quite the mafia.

David: Totally. If I'm remembering this, right, I think this is how we ended up at eBay. Of course at eBay, he was North America GM and then champion at the PayPal acquisition and ran PayPal within eBay. Pretty good. Then after that, remember, he left and became CEO of OpenTable. Who was OpenTable’s main venture capitalists and board member? Bill Gurley. The bete noire of Andreessen Horowitz. Jeff becomes one of the best consumer investors of the last decade at Andreessen Horowitz

Ben: He would go on to do the Airbnb investment, right?

David: Yeah, in 2011 right after joining. I believe the first right after joining, Pinterest. Pretty good. Then Airbnb, then Instacart, then a firm a couple years later, many others. He's done so well that in 2019, he actually became a managing partner. They made him a managing partner of Andreessen Horowitz, the firm alongside Marc and Ben, and Scott Cooper, who's also a managing partner, but more like the COO of Andreessen.

Ben: I get the sense the four of them are really the stewards of the firm at this point.

David: Yeah, that's a good word. That's what Sequoia calls the Sequoia stewards. They're the four stewards of Andreessen Horowitz. Quick recap, this is just a small sampling of the 2011 deals at Andreessen Horowitz. According to Pitchbook, ShoeDazzle, Jawbone, Bump, Lightshow, Fab, Airbnb, Pinterest, Stripe, Nicira, Tiny Speck, Facebook, Twitter, Groupon. What a collection.

Ben: They did Stripe?

David: They did, the seed. They didn't leave it, but they were part of the seed.

Ben: Fascinating.

David: Yeah, slugging percentage not batting average. You've already alluded to it, you've already spoiled the biggest mistake in the history of Andreessen Horowitz that they made in 2011. I was going to ask if you knew what it was, but obviously, you know what it is.

Ben: Which would lead to a subsequent success, like a multi billion dollar success, but…

David: Yeah, Uber, fall of 2011. This is brutal. Brad Stone does great reporting on this in The Upstarts. Andreessen Horowitz is in line, specifically Jeff Jordan. Could you imagine what a monster year it already was for Jeff? Pinterest, Airbnb, all in the same year. He's in line, handshake on a deal to lead Uber's Series B.

Of course, who was Uber's Series A investor? Benchmark and Bill Gurley. We got this huge feud between the firm's but like, hey, Bill Gurley was on Jeff's board. They're great. They know each other. We're going to make the piece here. Handshake deal, it's all done. Jeff is going to lead it, hot streak is going to continue. Marc's involved. Everybody's shaking hands on a deal at a slightly over $300 million post money valuation for Uber's Series B.

Ben: This reminds me of the Berkshire episode when Warren buys Berkshire.

David: I know, it's brutal. God, it's so brutal. Somebody and Brad implies in The Upstarts that it was Marc himself who starts to get cold feet about the deal. He takes Travis out to dinner and he tells him at dinner, they still want to do the deal, but they can only do 220 posts, not 305 or 310 or whatever it was supposed to be. That's a pretty big haircut.

It gets worse. Supposedly, Travis was still going to take the deal. He really wanted Andreessen Horowitz to be the lead. All the marketing had worked. He was going to do it, but then the actual term sheet arrived and in the actual term sheet, they must have really had cold feet. They didn't want to do this deal.

Ben: This is half-assing your way into a term sheet right here.

David: This is limping across the finish line if I've ever seen it. They put a huge new option pool refresh in there, which of course would dilute existing shareholders and particularly the entrepreneurs even more. That's the straw that breaks the camel's back. Travis is like, he very politely tells them he's not going to take the term sheet. Typical Travis fashion. Nope, scorched earth. Big mistake.

Ben: Was it Menlo that ends up doing the deal?

David: Menlo, who was, according to Brad, the stalking horse for the deal on valuation. They come in, they're like, oh, yeah, we'll do. Do you want over 300 posts? No problem, we got that, which ironically, is the Andreessen Horowitz playbook that's going to be dashing them on.

Ben: Right. Andreessen Horowitz has conditioned us all that we can pay 50%–100% more than we thought for deals. Not only will we win them, but that may actually work out for us well in the future.

David: It worked out real well for Menlo, not Andreessen Horowitz. So sad for Andreessen, great for Menlo.

Ben: Of course, they would go on to invest in Lyft. Let me go look at my best guess data here. I think they owned about 6% at IPO. If you think about when the lockup would have ended, it'd be about a $16 billion market cap at that point. They ended up with a billion dollar stake of Lyft at the time that they could liquidate.

David: If you want to get really nerdy about this—we covered this, of course, on our Lyft and Uber episodes back in the day—at this time, while this Series B is happening, Uber is a black card company. Nobody's doing peer-to-peer ride sharing yet, nobody. It wasn't until 2013 when Lyft would be the one that would pioneer, take the Homobiles' playbook and do true peer-to-peer ride sharing. That's when Andreessen invested in Lyft, where they saw the future.

Ben: Then Uber launches UberX and the war is on.

David: Exactly. You don't really want to cross Travis Kalanick.

Ben: Just to be like super crisp about this, it's a huge, huge loss. Sure, Lyft ended up being worth $16 billion. Uber at that point was worth $80 billion. It would have been a completely different fund dynamic if they were in Uber instead of Lyft.

David: Totally, huge loss. Man, 2011, what a freaking year for tech period, but also for Andreessen Horowitz too. You know what else happens in 2011? Literally right before the Uber deal goes down, which just makes it all the more mind-bending that Marc would get cold feet here.

Ben: No.

David: Software is eating the world.

Ben: Oh, my gosh. That's when he published the Op-Ed?

David: August, 2011, right before the Uber deal goes down. Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal. Crazy. The piece itself, it's a masterwork of arguing this, there is no bubble thesis. At this point in time, people still think tech is overvalued and we're still in the shadow of the financial crisis.

Marc talks about in the piece, he says, "Today's stock market actually hates technology, as shown by the all-time low price-to-earnings as ratios for major public technology companies." Apple, for example, has a P/E ratio of around 15.2, the same as the broader stock market despite Apple's immense profitability and dominant market position. Today, Apple's P/E ratio is 32.5, Microsoft is 39, Amazon is 69. The market didn't hate tech or just didn't recognize tech at this point in time.

Ben: Which is fascinating because those companies did have unbelievable gross margin profiles and continually high growth rates for public companies. Not as high as they have now. It's crazy to watch all these companies continue to grow the rate at which they're accelerating, even today, even later in their life. At that point, he's totally right that investors and public markets hadn't really realized this about tech companies yet.

The other thing that he sharpens his pencil on this point later, I don't think he makes it as directly in the software is eating the world thesis, but he now argues, look, compute costs are just going to zero. Truly, it's going to asymptotically approach zero. At some point, if you have infinite free compute, which we should say, that does require continuous innovations in energy because it does take a lot of energy to do stuff and that's the big knock on crypto, let's make the assumption that compute asymptotically approaches a cost of $0, then the question becomes, what's the interesting thing that you can do with software, even if you have to have it do a lot of compute to do the thing that you want it to do?

David: The thing that's so cool that I didn't put together until doing the research for this episode, remember, last time we talked about the Mike Moritz line that I don't think is public, I think it's more like an internal saying that every successive generation of technology companies should be an order of magnitude bigger because of Moore's Law, because the cost of compute declines. That means that every successive generation can address an order of magnitude, more industry is more people, and thus, the outcome should be bigger, and every fund's performance should surpass the last.

It's the same argument as software's eating the world. It's exactly the same argument. Compute cost declines. Marc says in the piece, "More and more major businesses and industries are being run on software and delivered as online services, from movies to agriculture to national defense. Over the next 10 years, I expect more industries to be disrupted by software with the new world beating Silicon Valley companies during the disruption in more cases than not." That's exactly what happens.

Ben: The only thing I will disagree with in your comment is that every successive generation of funds should be that much better than the previous. Because as we've seen, even in the earliest stages, price goes up. Your entry point continues to be higher and higher, even though, as you're pointing out, your exit value or the addressable market of every single company continues to be greater and greater as software companies.

David: You're making the anti Andreessen Horowitz argument.

Ben: Someone's got to make it here on this optimistic program.

David: I love it. So great.

Ben: Also then, there is this question of like, will that always be true? There are three billion people on Facebook now. At some point, if you saturate the entire global population with compute at their fingertips, and you take up 24 hours of their day, and you have 100% of their value creating activities, AKA their jobs running on software, at some point, especially because the population is not growing, it would seem that you no longer have an order of magnitude greater addressable market than in the previous year, but we're probably very far from that horizon, or an order of magnitude more than the previous decade.

David: I think it looks like now that crypto is going to be the next answer to that. What is the next value of Moore's Law accelerating and decreasing? You said a lot of energy.

Ben: David Rosenthal calling it here on air.

Ben: I think Andreessen Horowitz has been calling it for a while.

Ben: 2013.

David: Back to that. After software's eating the world at the end of 2011, in January 2012, they go out and they raised Fund 3, $1.5 billion. Oh, my gosh, get at me.

Ben: You thought we were big before. Watch this.

David: Watch this. That $1.5 billion fund, get this, was 7.5% of all of the venture money raised globally in 2012. One fund, one firm.

Ben: Wow, that's wild.

David: Isn't that crazy?

Ben: It's interesting because in a lot of ways, Andreessen Horowitz was just slightly out of step with the growth of the rest of the venture ecosystem. They took advantage of these like arbitrageable moments, where the one that you were talking about, where they realized, wait a minute, there's actually less risk in Series A than there used to be because there's all these seed investors. Therefore, we should invest at Series A because we can get paid too much in equity for the risk that we're taking or more appropriately, other people are getting paid too much in equity for the risk that they're taking, so we can price higher. They're doing it again here, where this is really two years before the race is really on in raising massive, massive funds. They can play that to their advantage, too.

David: Yup. And what's the other piece of the arbitrage here? It's the summit, it's the TAs, it's the Silver Lakes. They raised $1.5 billion venture fund, 7.5% of all venture money raised in 2012, but a big portion of that isn't going to venture in the same way. Pretty quickly after they raised the fund, at the time you're like, this is nuts. $100 million Series A in GitHub.

Ben: GitHub, that's right. That was the first real capital that GitHub had raised.

David: It has been bootstrapped all the way. It was the first real cap. This wasn't a Series A. This was the type of deal that a generation earlier, Summit, Insight, Silver Lake, or whoever wouldn't be doing.

Ben: This was the largest "Series A" ever.

David: Masterful PR and branding of this is a Series A. There's no way in hell this was a Series A.

Ben: I think they bought 10% of the company or something.

David: Yeah, I think even more. I think it was a 750 post money valuation.

Ben: That sounds familiar.

David: Yeah, whatever, slightly more than 10%.

Ben: I do know that they would end up making a billion dollars on this in the ultimate sale to Microsoft in 2018.

David: Yup. That almost returns the whole fund. This is how that type of investing works, very low downside, still pretty high upside. They 10X'd their money.

Ben: Again, going back to before, a 10X actually not interesting to an early stage investor. You need to be in that 50X to 100X territory to make the portfolio math work for that to be the big winner in the portfolio. However, if you're investing $100 million out of your $1.6 billion fund, then that $100 million 10X-ing, very impactful for the fund.

David: Very impactful. Totally. Later in 2012, Chris Dixon joins the firm. Chris, of course, was a very, very well-known New York entrepreneur, venture capitalist. He started SiteAdvisor and then Hunch which was acquired by eBay. He started Founder Collective, the seed VC firm. He had been part of Bessemer earlier in his career.

I remember it because I used to live in New York. People really identified him with New York venture capital. He's like, going to Silicon Valley joining Andreessen Horowitz. This was big news. Shortly after he gets there in 2013, he leads a Series B, $25 million in Coinbase at a 150 post. Wow, oh, man. Really overpaying for that one.

Ben: 150 post. What is this thing even do? Crypto.

David: Here's the kicker. Over the years, Andreessen Horowitz would keep buying shares from other investors. Other early investors were selling shares, including USV and others. Andreessen was just buying, buying, buying, buying. This is like, venture's a power law. We're talking about so many great outcomes here. This one dwarfs everything else.

At the DPO, Andreessen Horowitz's stake earlier this year in Coinbase is worth $11 billion. Oh, my God. That's 7X. That entire $1.5 billion fund like, oh, my God.

Ben: Thank God for the investors and that $1.6 billion fund that that Coinbase investment was out of this fund, instead of one of the smaller funds because returning a $1.6 billion fund, no easy feat, but if you have one $11 billion dollar return in there, okay.

David: Yeah, and this is the whole thesis. These outcomes are bigger than you think. There is no bubble. These valuations are not just justified, but the crazy prices we're paying now, we're getting the deal.

Ben: It's wild.

David: It's wild. They invest all told in 76 new companies in 2012. In 2013, they add another 97 new companies, including Lyft and PagerDuty, which is going to be another great win for them. Robinhood, they only do the seed in Robin Hood. I think they don’t continue until—

Ben: I think that's right. I think until like 2020 or something, they did it with the growth fund.

David: Yeah, Oculus.

Ben: By the way, all this great data that we're finding from our friends of the show at Pitchbook is just an awesome resource for digging through this and figuring out who participated in what round.

David: Totally. So great for this episode. Databricks is in 2013, which is still private, but that's going to be a monster for them.

Ben: Most recently valued at $28 billion, they led the seed round and have participated in (I think) every round since. I bet they own a ton of that company.

David: I bet, yeah. I can't wait to see that S1. I just love this episode. We've got so much great stuff and we've got so much funny stuff too. Zenefits, that was 2013.

Ben: I forgot they were in Zenefits.

David: They were the big ones in Zenefits. They were holding that bag for sure. Clinkle, remember Clinkle?

Ben: Yeah.

David: One of my GSP classmates spent his summer at Clinkle. He didn't go back full-time. That was a good choice. The kicker, this may be my favorite part of the whole episode. In 2013, they band together, a band of brothers, three musketeers, it ends up being called, with Google Ventures and Kleiner Perkins to create the Google Glass Collective.

This is the most ridiculous thing ever. It wasn't a fund. It wasn't like the crypto fund and the bio fund that we're going to talk about in a minute here. It was a collective, where the three firms said they were going to share Google Glass-related deal flow, but no actual commitment to invest.

Ben: What? That's an incredible PR. To be able to plant that story is impressive work because that's a non-story.

David: It's a total non-story.

Ben: I agreed to share deals with other investors all the time. That's a non-story.

David: There's a huge press release. There's an event, a big TechCrunch piece. Money quote from Marc Andreessen in the TechCrunch piece, "You put on glass and you say, yup, that's the future." Yup, that's the future. Marc. Can't win them all.

Ben: I do legitimately think augmented reality, both visually and audio, is the next big compute platform.

David: Totally, yeah.

Ben: But was Google Glass? No.

David: That's so great. We tweeted the photo of Bill Maris from Google Ventures, John Doerr from Kleiner, and Marc Andreessen wearing the Google glasses and posing on Sand Hill. Oh, my God. What a classic photo. It's just great. Despite all that, things continue to go pretty well. In 2014, Marc gets really into Twitter, he tweets something like—

Ben: It’s over 100 times a day.

David: Despite being an angel investor in Twitter, he had only tweeted twice before 2014. I remember thinking that was ridiculous back in the day that all these people who were talking about how they invested in Twitter and blah-blah-blah had never actually participated on the platform. I think Fred Wilson was the only one who actually was active on the platform. Then for whatever reason, in 2014, Marc decides, hey, I'm going to get really into this. He tweets like 20,000 times in six months.

Ben: It's wild. He was the best person to follow because if you were interested in mental models and exploring wacky futuristic ideas, it was a buffet table of that.

David: Yup. People, of course, also creates press and everybody wants to know, why is he tweeting so much? It's so great. He says in some interview, he loves Twitter because, "Reporters are obsessed with it. It's like a tube and I have loudspeakers installed in every reporting cubicle around the world." So great.

March of 2014, they closed another $1.5 billion fund, just a little over two years after Fund 3, the $1.5 billion fund.

Ben: Assets under management here about $4 billion.

David: Yup. They do Instacart, Reddit, Magic Leap. They do all sorts of stuff. Interestingly, though, the pace actually steps down a little bit. They stopped doing quite as many seeds during this time period. They've now since stepped back up the seeds, but I think maybe they started listening to folks about the signaling talk, or maybe entrepreneurs were actually listening to the signaling effect.

Ben: It was resonating with people. To recall a conversation we had when you were starting your venture firm in, when was that?

David: 2017–2018, yeah.

Ben: This was part of the thesis. You were like, well, no one wants to raise seed rounds from the Series A firms because of the signaling risks. We're a pure play seed firm and I think that makes a lot of sense. The professionalization of the asset class of seed happened because of that.

David: Of the signaling effect. Yeah, totally. It's just so funny. It's completely disappeared now.

Ben: In so many ways, everyone has followed Andreessen Horowitz's lead in truly every way. The one that we're describing here is shrugging a little bit on what stage is the right one for me, and how much do I need to stick to my knitting, and how much does signal matter?

David: Yup. In 2015, finally, The New Yorker piece comes out. It's so good. It's so damn good. You got to go read it.

Ben: Tomorrow's Advance Man.

David: Tad Friend is such a good writer. This is once every year, a couple of years. The New Yorker is like, we're going to do a profile on an industry. They talk about this on the a16z podcast. I think it's the episode with Margit, the opportunity to have the profile on venture capital in The New Yorker and to have Marc Andreessen be the mouthpiece for it. It's so great. Can I read a couple lines because these are so good?

Ben: Please do, yeah.

David: First off, the piece starts off with a little vignette of Mixpanel, which, of course, was a big Andreessen investment. He's talking to the founder, Suhail Doshi, about his experience raising venture capital and whatnot. He says, this quote is so good, "Mediocre VCs want to see that your company has traction. The top VCs want you to show them that you can invent the future." It's so funny and it's so true. It's just great.

Let's see, “Andreessen and Horowitz modeled their brand strategy not on the industry's elite, but on Larry Ellison's Oracle and its aggressive marketing during the enterprise software wars. For one investor in their funds, Princeton University's chief investment officer Andrew Golden, it became a running joke. How long would it take other firms to complain about Andreessen Horowitz? In the early days, it was within two minutes," he says.

Here we go. This might be my favorite part. "One morning, as I sat down to breakfast with Andreessen, a rival VC sent me a long email about a16z's holdings. The VC estimated that because Andreessen's firm had taken so many growth positions, its average ownership stake was roughly 7.5%. It's actually 8%, which meant that to get 5X–10X across its four funds, you would need your aggregate portfolio to be worth $240–$480 billion. How could that possibly be? I started to check the math with Andreessen. He made a jerking off motion and said, blah-blah-blah we have all the models, we're elephant hunting, going after big game.” That rival VC would take the time to type out a long email.

Ben: And would take the time to have themselves or an analyst go model out a different firm's average ownership. Are you kidding me?

David: So great. Model out close enough to be within half a percent of the actual number.

Ben: Totally. Wait a minute. That's actually an interesting question. They would need, what were the numbers of how much market cap in aggregate would need to be created?

David: $240–$480 billion of market cap.

Ben: You got Coinbase at 100?

David: Right around a cool 100.

Ben: You got Roblox at 45, so that's 145. You got Okta at 33, so that's around 170. You got Slack at 24. No.

David: Something like that. Let's take it to 200, around 200. You got Airbnb, that's another 100 right there.

Ben: Yup. You got Pinterest, which is another 45–50.

David: Yup. All right, so we're at 350.

Ben: You can see sending that email being a good luck effing luck and you do look at the companies they invested and you're like, yup, they've far surpassed that. We haven't talked about Instacart, Databricks, or Robinhood. Of course, these are smaller positions.

David: It's so, so good. Then Marc's response, makes a jerking off motion with his hand. It says, we're elephant hunting, we're going after big game.

Ben: That has to be the first time that was printed in The New Yorker. It must be.

David: So great.

Ben: The interesting thing is, the whole industry seems to massively give Whiplash from some new disruptive entrant, often who's writing bigger checks and has a bigger fund. The first reaction is, oh, my God, complain about them.

David: See, Tiger today.

Ben: Exactly. It was Andreessen Horowitz, and then it was SoftBank, and then it was Tiger. At least with Andreessen Horowitz, it seems like—I don't mean information that's not public—with SoftBank Vision Fund 1, strategy worked a heck of a lot better than people thought it was, at least a lot better than the media was reporting.

I suppose the next time, my knee jerk reaction is to be like, oh, these new guys, they don't know what they're doing, they're being irresponsible, and they're blowing us out of the water. Maybe think twice about just complaining and figure out, okay, how do I actually need to adjust my strategy because maybe this is going to work?

David: You couldn't have teed me up any better here. Back to The New Yorker article. His quote, “A16z's services model made a strong impression on Sand Hill Road. Andreessen caused us to up our game on the marketing side," said Sequoia capital's Doug Leone. "Younger founders pay attention to media and we don't want to be depositioned. Sequoia hired an in-house publicist and two new marketing specialists to complement the four it had, and most top firms made similar moves, even if they primarily believed that a16z's services were simply a marketing tool." So Doug, so Sequoia. We're not going to be depositioned. Yes, this is a good innovation, we're going to adopt it.

Ben: Yeah. It's Bill Gates, Ian in that way.

David: Yup, totally.

Ben: I can't wait until power to talk about this one. It's so interesting to me that this caused effectively margin compression in the venture capital industry.

David: Ownership compression.

Ben: No, I literally mean margin compression and how profitable it is to be a general—

David: You mean the management fee side of things?

Ben: Yeah. It's hard to run lean as a big firm because you need all this stuff to be competitive, and that stuff is really expensive. It's a big team. You can't just take home $10 million in fees every year.

David: Even if you're Sequoia, you need a big team.

Ben: Totally. You end up with this fascinating dichotomy. It's the same thing that's happening in the media ecosystem where there is no more middle. If you are going to be one of the few who succeed and you're big, you have to have a big ass cost structure. Andreessen Horowitz is the New York Times of venture capital.

Simultaneously, it will be true that there's this long tail of people. They're like, F that big cost structure. I'm going to start kindergarten ventures and take my small amount of capital and no team, and I'm going to play a completely different super niche game. There is some room in the middle, but there's not the room that there used to be in the middle.

David: Yup. I think the industry has found that out, painfully, over the last 10 years.

Ben: Yeah, but this really interesting thing of like, it took a long time. It took 30 years or 40 years of venture capital as a profession for the arbitrage of profits to go away from general partners.

David: Yup. Flip side of this coin both on the staffing and the services side of things, but also on the deals and the valuations front. Just like the support, it just beats me over the head. Maybe this will sound biased towards Andreessen Horowitz, but I'm not trying to be. I'm really just doing this research, thinking about the last 10 years. There is no bigger winner in all of this than entrepreneurs.

Ben: For sure.

David: Oh, my God. You used to be giving up 25%–30%+ of your company at Series A, and getting $2 million for that, and somebody sitting on your board doing something, maybe.

Ben: You're absolutely right. I was talking about the margin compression and fees. Now let's talk about the margin compression in returns. Everyone's cost basis is higher because there's way more capital competing to go in. Therefore, your ownership percentages are going to be less for the same amount of capital that you wanted to put to work.

David: Even on the fees side, VSB entrepreneurs, they're just getting a lot more. You can argue all you want and people do about how valuable these various services are and whatnot, but I think it's pretty valuable that somebody, Andreessen Horowitz in the lead but now the whole industry, is out there just banging the drum about how great startups are and how great their portfolios are.

If you're an entrepreneur, why would you not want somebody championing you? In a way, that's going to be so hard for you as a founder of a small company to do. You're not going to go get a profile on The New Yorker, but Andreessen is, and they're going to talk about how awesome you are.

Ben: Yeah, it makes the most sense for these things, where it doesn't yet make sense for a startup to have that competency in-house. Having access to a fractional resource of that competency, who's a specialist and one of the best in the world at it and really highly paid who you couldn't afford for how sort of tiny and pathetic your company is, which all startups are, it is an unbelievable boon to get that. Not only are you facing less dilution and getting more capital than you ever used to before, but you are also actually getting a far superior product to what you used to get.

David: It sounds like our Capchase ad-read from last season. I love it. One playbook theme I want to highlight here—we'll talk about this again at the end—any time your name is on your competitors' lips, you're winning. You're winning. It doesn't matter what they're saying. If they are talking about you, good, bad, ugly, indifferent, you're winning. You should just keep doing what you're doing.

Ben: Particularly when they're the most successful incumbent of all time with Sequoia.

David: After that, later in 2015 they raised a $200 million bio fund. June of 2016 they raised another $1.5 billion core fund. 2017 they raised $450 million second bio fund. 2018 first $300 million crypto fund led by Chris Dixon and new GP, Katie Haun. Interestingly, I didn't know this about Katie until doing the research. Do you know what her background was before she joined Andreessen?

Ben: No.

David: She was a federal prosecutor at the DOJ and she led the Mt. Gox case.

Ben: Whoa, awesome.

David: Then after that, Coinbase recruited her to join the board of Coinbase after the Mt. Gox debacle. They were like, look, we're Coinbase, were doing this aboveboard, we're the right way to do this. That's how Chris met Katie and then she came into Andreessen. Super in demand. Crypto is so different from the rest of the startup ecosystem.

Also in 2018, they launched the Cultural Leadership Fund, which got a lot of blowback at the time and I think was pretty misunderstood. I think it's actually a pretty good idea. 2019 they split the main fund, finally, into separate funds for early and growth. $750 million for early, $2 billion for growth. Then 2020, just one year later, they're back in the game with $1.3 billion main early fund 7, $3.2 billion growth fund 2, $750 million bio fund 3, $515 million crypto fund 2. That's $6 billion in total across a suite of funds raised in 2020.

Ben: Strength follows strength.

David: Dang. Then this year, of course, in 2021, they added another $2.2 billion crypto fund 3 bringing total capital under management to just a hair under $19 billion.

Ben: I've got some other stats about Andreessen Horowitz today, and I think we'll talk a little bit more about them today before going into analysis. It is time for our second sponsor of the episode, Pitchbook. Of course, the stats that I'm about to tell you are from Pitchbook.

Many, if not all, I think everyone probably at this point has heard of Pitchbook. You know they're the leading financial data provider for VC, P/E, M&A, and podcasts about those things. Their database is crazy, 3.1 million companies, 1.5 million deals, 96% of clients rate that Pitchbook's coverage of private companies is better than any other data provider. I use it for PSL stuff, I use it for Acquired stuff, as you know. It's totally unparalleled. It's a huge part of our research process, as you know.

We want to tell you about a special offer, where you can explore Pitchbook's database first hand by signing up to get limited access. This limited access is a little bit different. I think that you might not be able to download reports, but you can basically browse anything you want. You get this for free for two weeks. You can get that by visiting pitchbook.com/acquired or clicking the link in the show notes.

All right, other things that I pulled from Pitchbook about the firm today. They made us this great tearsheet. We'll have to see if we can share this in Slack. It's a great set of data on the firm. They did a little under 1000 investments in a little over 500 portfolio companies total. They've produced 160 exits, 20 of which were companies going public. There's now 22 GPs with the addition of a new New York–based GP, the first time there's been someone outside of the Bay Area hired as a GP, David Haber.

David: That’s right. Another friend of the show.

Bend: David, as you mentioned, $19 billion, hereunder in assets under management, 8 network teams, 220 people now work at the firm. To give you a sense, they've got 22 GPs, but that means that 90% of the people who work at the firm are not GPs. They've got a big investment team, but obviously, these network teams have grown meaningfully.

I also was talking to some folks. They did a lot of hiring outside of the Bay Area during Covid, as much as they were one of the champions of Bay Area for life. If you're serious, you invest here. The best companies are created here, blah-blah-blah. The last year has really changed that. Not only are they investing in more places, but they actually have staff in more places, and have adapted the culture and the processes internally to be hybrid.

David: Then also, we debated including all this in the history and facts. I think for a length, if nothing else but also to do it right, we're going to do a different venue to talk all about this, but they've also built a media company alongside all of this.

Ben: Yeah, absolutely. There's a whole forward-looking view of—

David: A future-looking view, one might say?

Ben: Yes, I was trying to avoid, let's call it future-looking view, not only of the media company but other things that they're doing that transcend to being a venture firm with value added services. I think, as Marc recently coined it, and he had a great invest, like the best episode on this HP 2.0. There's definitely a lot more that we'll talk about there, probably in a future episode at some point.

David: Yeah. I think that's the right way to do it. That's Andreessen Horowitz. Wait, there is one more piece to talk about. There's this great saying in venture that is also a Mike Moritz phrase—he's so good—which is that "the apples take longer to ripen than the lemons." Of course, apples being a double entendre meaning good companies but also Apple. Getting Sequoia's case, so good.

They start having some success. April 2017, success on the distribution front. Okta IPO, March 2019; Lyft IPO, April 2019; Pagerduty, Pinterest, June 2019; the Slack DPO, December 2020; Airbnb, January 2021; Affirm, March 2021; Roblox, which within a year they turn around 15X on that.

Ben: Yeah, here, I actually calculated that. Their initial investment into Roblox, which I think is out of their late stage fund, the growth fund, somewhere between $100 million and $150 million. It was a $150 million round at a $4 billion valuation.

David: So great. Big shout out to our friends at Altos.

Ben: Totally. It means they own probably about 2.5% of the company at IPO, which of course, is a $45 billion market cap today. Pretty quick turnaround for that $100–$150 million into $1.2 billion.

David: Then the big one, April 2021. What’s that? Seven years after the initial investment?

Ben: Coinbase.

David: Coinbase. Damn. $11 billion stake that Andreessen Horowitz has in Coinbase.

Ben: Which I think is an even better outcome, or it's about on par with what Sequoia had with Airbnb, if I remember right from our episode there.

David: Yeah, it sounds about right. Maybe a little less. I want to see Sequoia had a 15%-ish stake in Airbnb, 13%, 15%, something like that.

Ben: I seem to remember this $10–$12 billion absolute return.

David: That could be, but Airbnb traded up to around $100 billion. I think it might be back down a little bit now. Anyway, we're splitting hairs here. These are pretty good.

Ben: In any case, one of the single greatest venture capital returns of all time.

David: Yeah. Hard to argue.

Ben: We're definitely going to get to grading. I did a little bit of math. It's napkin math, but I think it's interesting to review this, but let's do some analysis first. Let's take our narrative section. What's the bull case and what's the bear case on Andreessen Horowitz moving forward? Let's start with the bull.

David: I think we just painted the bull case. I got two bull cases. One, crypto. If you believe crypto is the next...

Ben: I wrote two and you've just got the first one.

David: Okay. Next bull case I would have, I'm curious if you'd have this as well, a16z has been pretty adamant (like you said) about Bay Area and in particular about western technology companies that they invested in. They haven't touched China, India, et cetera, or the rest of the world. No reason to think that their brand couldn't extend. That feels like a green shot for them. Those are the two off the top of my head.

Ben: I like that I didn't have that. The second one I had is this HP 2.0 notion of, in the old days before there existed a startup ecosystem where you could get funded by venture capitalists to go and pursue your idea, you would try and rise up the ranks of an HP or one of these companies as an executive to go and invent the future. HP was the 100% owner of every division. GE was the 100% owner of every division of their company.

Obviously, taking minority positions is different, but can you be more of the Hewlett Packard in their heyday if you aren't the majority shareholder of these businesses? Can you still find a way? Now we're drifting into Kleiner Perkins territory a little bit, but can you find a way to both provide the services, find synergies between portfolio companies, and really find leverage from your own scale, such that you can find economies of scale across the different companies? By that, does everyone really need their own totally separate finance team?

At some scale, probably not, the same kind of thing that you see in industry consolidation when one company buys another. I'll be very curious if they transcend the ‘we help you out with part-time resources’ thing in their networks to see if there's some way, where actually some part of the fundamental operations of the company are happening at the venture level.

David: Interesting. It's maybe an actual fulfillment of the CAA dream execution machine thing. Because the CAA package, like Jurassic Park, the packages that they were putting together, the talent, they weren't doing anything. Part of the reason CAA had to exist was like, they're not going to pull together, I don't know. I don't know what goes into making a movie, but I'm assuming there's a lot of stuff that the studio's used to do, and that CAA was able to bring together into a package and then be like, nope. Studios, you're just financers, now.

Ben: Totally.

David: I wonder if this is part of what's informing this HP 2.0 strategy.

Ben: The thing that I wrote down is that the biggest case is that the firm is actually unrecognizable in 10 years, that they're the startup platform. They're like an idea platform. I'm not being specific about what that means because I don't really know, but maybe the right term is that they're like the startup dream machine, which actually lends itself more toward a studio. Just based on all the work we've done at PSL starting 27 companies, I do wonder if they'll shift earlier and start being more of like a, you literally are a person with an idea and we have an ability to take that and plug it in.

The cool thing about the studio is we have that machinery built for the first 18 months. I'd be curious. A lot of people talk about seed to IPO as an investor. It'll be interesting to see if Andreessen Horowitz can become the startup dream machine all the way from idea to IPO.

David: Yeah, or you could just go raise a whole lot of money and you could be the next disruptor in the industry.

Ben: It's a great point. It's really like that Marc and Ben have no sacred cows. They're very experimental, they're very willing to change things. It wouldn't surprise me if at some point in the near future they stop talking about it as a venture capital firm because they feel that it's a broader set of activities.

David: Clearly, they're already going this direction with the media company and all that.

Ben: Yup. We also totally skipped over crypto, which I think is okay, but can you give one or two sentences on how they're different from other firms with a lens toward crypto?

David: In one respect, it is just simply that they're first and early. They've been part of these big ones. Other firms have, too. USV being primary among them, and then native crypto firms like Paradigm, Multicoin, and all those great folks, but to the extent that success breeds success is going to apply in early-stage crypto investing as it always has in venture.

Andreessen has been there, like Coinbase, dang. Solana, yup. Everything interesting, they're there. I think that's a big part of it. The other piece of it is that it's different doing that. They've built the machinery to do it in a way that other traditional venture firms have not. Have I understand the history right, I think part of the reason why they created a separate fund for crypto versus doing it out of the main fund was because of the same things that secondaries needing to be an RIA.

I think if you do too much token investing in a core fund, you would need to register and you would lose your venture capital exemption. While other firms were registering as RIAs to do secondaries, which of course Andreessen also does, they were like, oh, we'll go do this first with crypto funds and then now for the whole firm, to be able to buy tokens instead of equity. I think it's just going to take a lot of firms a long time to catch up to that.

Ben: And the operations of things of staying abreast of the things you can do in the US versus international takes overhead. They've invested in that overhead and they've figured out what the necessary infrastructure is from a regulatory perspective to do crypto investing with LP dollars.

David: Yup. Should we talk about the bear case?

Ben: Yeah. Here's my biggest one. We have been on an unprecedented, unbelievable bull run in tech that started the same year that Andreessen Horowitz was founded. They've never operated in a down market. I'm not saying it's not going to go well, but their strategy has aligned perfectly with the economic landscape while they've been operating in it.

It is untested, unlike all these other firms. If you believe the a16z haters who say, they have no price discipline, will that come back to haunt them during the one or two funds from the vintage years of whatever downturn comes at some point in the future? It could hit them a lot harder than it hits other folks. You don't have to debate that. I'm just saying.

David: Yeah, totally. Question mark.

Ben: That would be the knock. The other bear case I was thinking of is they basically overextend themselves in trying to get too creative and imagining what this HP 2.0 could look like. They have a great, very profitable business on their hands where they have really dominated an industry, and them trying to turn that into something entirely new and different may actually not work.

David: I got to also say, for a firm and people that are so good on branding, marketing, and whatnot, calling the strategy HP 2.0, you might want to rethink that one. I don't know that HP is something you really want to associate with these days.

Ben: There's just not that many people alive and operating in the business world right now or leading companies in an aspirational way who are aware of the HP that Marc talks about. They're only aware of the defunct PC manufacturer.

David: You want to say Amazon 2.0? Great. Anyway, I have no view one way or the other way whether this is happening or not, or at risk of happening, would just be that as you turn this into a big firm, it's already a big firm. Politics are going to start to creep in. It happens. This happens in organizations. Frankly, probably politics have been the downfall of every venture firm that has risen and fallen to varying relative degrees.

There are all sorts of reasons, but if you break it down at the end of the day, it's people, it's politics. That's the problem. The bigger you get, the more opportunities there are. The bigger you get, the more time that goes by, the more opportunities there are for that. Maybe some seams will start to get exposed, other firms can now come along and, yeah, to die hero or live long enough to be the villain. I guess they've been the villain their whole lives to a certain extent. At some point, they're going to be the villain to entrepreneurs.

Ben: In some way they've been the underdog, too. They've had this tailwind of feeling like, fight the man. You're right, they're the man.

David: They're the man.

Ben: One other thing I was thinking about is, speaking of Tiger Global and what's going on in hedge funds coming in to late stage financing, and now even early stage financing, those folks are beating the drum of, we're a financial investor. We're going to give you the cheapest available capital. You can use that capital to go and build your own relationships, hire people, and do all the things you need to do. VC is a bundle of both advice, relationships, capital, and we're just selling you pure capital.

There's some set of entrepreneurs who are going to do that because they're very experienced, they have their own relationships, they don't need the services that a firm like a16z brings to bear. The question is, will that belief spread? Where more and more people, even if they're inexperienced and could benefit from the set of services that a16z offers, if they're actually the most capital at the cheapest price sounds great to me, I actually just want all these competencies in house.

David: Which has hopefully, we've painted along the way here, was a key component of the Andreessen Horowitz strategy. There's all the stuff, there's all the services and everything about it, but also they were offering the best terms at the highest prices for a very long time. If they're no longer doing that, I think it's a very valid argument that price is what matters.

Ben: It's like Andreessen Horowitz had a different underwriting model on the future than the rest of the VCs did. So far, because we've been in this bull run this whole time, it has proven to be right. Everyone else who is being too conservative in their valuation models and basically underwriting of what future markets could look like, was wrong.

That's why Andreessen Horowitz could both be the best product at the best price, but it may prove to be the case at some point in the future that the gas in the tank runs out on software is eating the world, or that we go through a little extended hiccup, where people stop believing that for five years and the money coming after you dries up, and the LPs are difficult to raise from. I'm just imagining a little bit more capital-crunched environment, where you can't be both higher valuations with more money and a really expensive broad set of services.

David: Yup. Now in the long run, obviously, I think we all know what side we fall on here.

Ben: Everything, it depends on your time horizon. If your time horizon is infinite, then yes, you and I, being the optimist that we are, we're looking at this bear case being like, yeah, but as long as you can tough it out, it'll be fine.

David: The Internet. Never bet against the Internet.

Ben: Never bet against the Internet.

David: You're so spot-on about the underwriting thing, that they were just underwriting differently than everyone else, and more correctly the vignette from The New Yorker article with the competing VC—

Ben: Right. The point of that competing VC was like, this is crazy. The math doesn't work.

David: Their underwriting is wrong.

Ben: A16z is like, that thing that you said was crazy, where it's like, the math doesn't work because the numbers are too big. We think we can hit those numbers, and they did.

David: Yup, and they did.

Ben: By we, tech companies broadly that we invest in.

David: Yup. This isn't exactly a narrative one way or the other. Maybe it's a narrative about the industry as a whole. We made this point on the first episode that I want to double, triple underline, underscore here. We're telling this whole thing, and there's so much drama, and it's so fun. Andreessen's the underdog and the disrupter, and there's all this feuding and whatnot. This is all just great for everybody. It's just freaking fantastic for everybody.

The fact that The New Yorker is writing about tech, it's great for other VCs, it's great for startups, it's great for entrepreneurs, it's good for podcasts like you and me, it's great for Andreessen, it's great for Benchmark, it's great for Sequoia, full stop.

Ben: Yup, which is a great lead into power. This is interesting. I think that they had a source of power that worked really well for their first eight-ish years, and now they have a different power. Remember, for folks that are new to the show, power is the thing that enables a business to achieve persistent differential returns, like how can they be sustainably more profitable than their nearest competitor.

The first one was clearly counter positioning. We've used it several times in this show to describe the way that they positioned themselves in the press versus other folks, versus incumbents. I'm going to use it a little bit more specifically in this case, which is, they literally did things that other people could not do because their business models did not allow for it.

If you were to go to GPs epic firms and say, in order to bet on the future correctly, the way these other guys are and we need to staff up like this, overnight, we all need to stop taking salaries for the next three years, and we all make over a million dollars a year in salary and have personal lives and burn rates that have accommodated that. That's even before we start getting our carry.

The chances of that happening immediately, rather than over the next 5–8 years being forced to, was zero. There was that moment in time, much like how CAA was able to do it in the agency world, where they literally took a different business model and did a thing that the incumbents couldn't copy, which was genius. It's totally genius.

David: The other one was brand.

Ben: Totally, and that's the one that will last for the future. All this highfalutin stuff is great. All the value added services are great. All the networks are great. The executive briefing center is great. Let's not forget the business that we're in here, which is deploying capital and getting a return on that capital.

That is a commodity. Capital is a commodity. The way that commodity industries look is that they're pretty much undifferentiated because the vast majority of the value is available from near exact provider substitutes. What differentiates a commodity from another commodity? Brand.

David: Coke and Pepsi, baby. There was actually a great quote—I forget where. I almost put it in the script and I didn't—of an entrepreneur talking about the Andreessen, Benchmark thing, and they're just like, oh, it's so great. It's like watching Coke and Pepsi do a price war. I'm just sitting here sipping.

Ben: Truly. It's like watching a game of chess play out, too, because it is simultaneously true that having a great board member can be game changing for your company, having this set of services can be game changing for your company. I just watched—not to toot our own horn—some of the folks that were able to bring into portfolio companies through us at PSL recruiting them, trajectory changing for companies.

I've never worked at Andreessen Horowitz. I'm sure that works in speeds there. Even forget all the other services, if you have a great recruiting mechanism, game changing for companies. Also it is true that the primary value that comes from raising capital is the capital.

David: The brand piece is also interesting, too. Just riffing a little more on the Coke and Pepsi thing, back to the Benchmark versus Andreessen, Benchmark's brand, we are the Kraft venture capital firm. Andreessen's brand, we are the franchise. It's just like Coke and Pepsi, right? Coke is Coca-Cola classic with the polar bears and whatnot. Pepsi is like the taste of a new generation. It works. There's different segments that they address. It works.

Ben: It's funny. While we're talking about power, we should also talk about, when you talk about profits, persistent differential returns, you should literally talk about pricing power. In Forbes, it was reported that Andreessen Horowitz takes 30% carry. It's interesting to see that their returns and their market perception has literally turned into them being able to price higher than their competitors. This is LP phasing. When it's them versus other venture firms, they can say, yeah, you're going to get a worse deal with us than you're going to get with other people, but it's worth it. So you'll take it, and they do.

David: This is the Hamilton Helmer definition of brand power. You can charge a higher price for the same product. That's why people pay more for a Tiffany's diamond than a no-named diamond.

Ben: Yup. The brand thing is multi-sided. It's your brand entrepreneurs and it's your brand LPs.

David: Yup. The entrepreneur version of this is you get into the round. You get into the round and you get a large ownership allocation in the round.

Ben: Yup. All right, Playbook. I know we've done a lot of this already, but there's a few that I want to hit.

David: Go for it.

Ben: All right, just to review all the things that were unheard of or uncommon before a16z started doing them, GPs as former founders rather than investors, huge team of experts, which is now known as VC platform, calling everyone at the firm a partner, blogging, which other than Brad Feld and Fred Wilson doing transparency versus opacity and content marketing more broadly—that didn't really exist in venture—paying huge prices to blow your competitors out of the water and just offer much higher valuations and bigger checks.

David: It's crazy. Literally, nobody did that.

Ben: Yeah, it existed to some extent and in isolated ways, but no one just said, F it, we're doing it over and over and over again because we're underwriting the future differently than you are.

David: Yeah, and not really. People would be like, oh, I can't believe. Because I entered the industry in 2010. Andreessen was there, but it's still early days. It would be like, oh, I can't believe the price that X firm paid for this. We offered a six-pre and they did an eight-pre. Nobody was just step change.

Ben: Nobody said, what if you raised eight? Then we'll figure out how to value that. Lastly, venture firms investing in crypto. I think USV probably gets a little bit of credit. I think they were earlier in some ways but not nearly investing as many dollars and for as long a period and building a brand with the crypto community the way that Andreessen has gone on to. You look at those six things.

David: I would add seven, too, of PR, as well.

Ben: I guess I've put that into the content marketing, brand building, but you're right. It's a different function of marketing. Those seven things that you take at face value, like that's part of the job. That's what it is to be a venture capital firm, which just weren't things a decade-and-a-half ago, before Andreessen Horowitz made that a part of what it takes to do this job.

David: Yeah, I can't argue with that.

Ben: Literally, their playbook was to change the requirements of the job to be done for everyone else in the industry.

David: It was wild.

Ben: On that note, there's this interesting thing that I've been thinking about, which is, the common knock was that they were overpaying to buy name brand for themselves to buy their way into winners, which, first of all, even if they did that, it actually is a creative to their LPs since their LPs would benefit from being investors within this name brand fund in the future, assuming that they were going to continue investing in subsequent funds.

It actually was a good use of the capital, even if their prices were irrational, because great, now, in the first year when that fund was deployed, yeah, we might have overpaid for some deals, but now we're in a top three franchise. So awesome.

David: And the first funds ended up being good.

Ben: Right, but anybody argue today that they actually paid too high a valuation for anything they did from 2009 to 2015, absolutely not.

David: Yup. One other corollary to this is a playbook theme I wanted to make. We made this point in the last episode, but I don't think we've talked about it yet here. This is just so silly, and I didn't quite get this perspective until being outside of the institutional venture industry and now it's just obvious to me. It's so silly. Why would you ever publicly argue as a venture firm that valuations are too high? Who's your customer? Your customers are entrepreneurs.

That'd be saying a politician running and being like, taxes are too low. We need higher taxes. That is my platform. Not only that, but the specific other competitor of mine from the other party who's running, the problem with their platform is they want lower taxes. If you're an entrepreneur listening to this, you're like, I like lower taxes. I like higher valuations.

Ben: Right. That's a great point. Pick a different thing to argue about if that's your side.

David: You can feel that way all you want, but don't argue about it.

Ben: Right. Speaking of things that are specific to institutional VC, like we discussed on our VC fundamentals episodes in the LP show, there is an investment process that has to happen because there's a lot of partners. You need to figure out, we raised this fund, we got these 22 people. Isn't that crazy? It's 22 now, but even imagine a smaller partnership earlier on, 5, 6, 7 people, like how do we make decisions to invest this fund?

An interesting thing that they do is they do not have a consensus-based approach. I think, and this is according to the information which is LinkedIn sources, any GP can pull the trigger on any deal on their own. They can say things like, I'm going to bat for this. The way Marc describes it in some podcasts is that they assemble a red team. The way we've talked about this at PSL and I think I've talked about on LP episodes in the past is to have a foil if you're advocating. To turn a project into a spin out, someone should be the bear case on it or your foil.

Marc calls it the red team. He's like, we basically staff someone with the responsibility of going and trying to figure out why this is a bad investment. Because if you don't have the consensus of the partnership, and you're putting your name on the line, sure we should do that investment, maybe, like it's a good non consensus bet.

Also, you should have to go argue with someone who's going to present the other side of the case. He's like, we figured this out because Ben is my red team. I can come in and be super optimistic about something and Ben is naturally good at it because they fight like dogs. He’s naturally good at presenting the other side of my argument, and we decided to institutionalize that in the firm, which I think is really an interesting approach that both forces you to be diligent but also allows for non-consensus bets.

David: Interesting. I like that in theory. I wonder in practice how much it actually goes. You and I know these deals happen in days if not hours.

Ben: Lightning speed.

David: It's interesting.

Ben: At least in theory and great to talk about on a podcast.

David: Yeah, great to talk about on podcast. It makes total sense that there can be a consensus driven firm with that many people. You're never going to agree on anything.

Ben: Yup, especially at the pace that they're doing deals now because of the peace that the whole thing is working now.

Last one that I had that I thought was interesting that we didn't talk about any of this but Marc talks a lot about, which is he doesn't really believe in pivots, or the notion of failing fast, or the lean startup. I'm amenable to this argument even though I do a ton of testing of ideas.

The big innovations throughout history are made by true believers who just kept trying. There's something like the filament of a lightbulb was Edison's 200th attempt at creating filament. It may not be the right decision for you as an individual to keep ramming your head against a wall, but it's good for all of us as a society that there are a lot of people who are willing to keep running at something almost illogically so in a way that is potentially not in their best interest because that is where the true breakthroughs come from. If everybody's always looking at data from the first task and they're like, yeah, it's not really working, let's try something else, then you don't get the breakthrough animations.

David: Yup, that makes sense. I think both of these things are true, but certainly we didn't test Acquired and if we had tested Acquired in the early years, we'd probably have been well, that's not working very well.

Ben: Totally, but passion projects, passion leads you to do things that aren't necessarily economic. Then at some point, you look around and you're like, whoa, value creation has happened.

David: I love that image.

Ben: Hopefully not said in that sterile of language.

David: I like that. I'm going to use that with startup companies and just be like, guys, value creation has happened.

Ben: I was talking actually with a portfolio CEO the other day about how I really believe from doing Acquired now and we talked with Patrick [...] about this about brands just take time. People don't love stuff quickly. They're always skeptical of new stuff. So a brand is like time times absolute number of people who are familiar with the brand times the magnitude of how much they care about the brand.

Sure, you can get the coefficient on those second two factors to be very high, but it sure helps to have a lot of time because it multiplies through. Just looking back at Acquired and a16z now has this going for it, too, it is remarkable even if the product doesn't get any better and certainly the product for us and for what they offer has gotten dramatically better, that time existing in market continuing to bang your head against the wall, keep doing you thing, and being true to it. Even if it's an irrational decision because it might not pay off, the passion can allow you to stick it out long enough such that a brand can be built.

David: There's also once you get a brand like that. I guess this is the point of seven powers. Any of the powers, once you achieve them, you're just like a whole lot more robust than you used to be. Think about the first Andreessen fund and the Skype deal. If they had lost money on that, man, history might have been different.

Ben: Totally.

David: That could have torpedoed everything.

Ben: Yup.

David: Now they write a couple of million dollar cheques into something and it blows up in their face. Let's take Clubhouse. Jury is still out on Clubhouse but let's assume for a minute that they just play out a scenario where it goes to zero and they lose a whole bunch of money on it. Won't matter at all. Literally no impact.

Ben: That's such a good point.

David: Similarly like the early days of Acquired. If something really bad had happened, we probably would have quit, but not that I don't want to do this at all, but if we had a bad episode or something like that, we're probably going to be fine.

Ben: I don't know. This is like my constant paranoia because it's such a big risk to dedicate.

David: It does feel like a little tight roppy.

Ben: Listening to a podcast is a risk because—we're totally off topic here, but this is something I'm super fired up about—if an article is boring, it's fine because you skim it real quick and then under a minute, you're gone. If an episode sucks, you're like, wow, I just dedicated an hour, two hours, three hours of my life to this thing, I'm not going to trust these people to produce things that are high quality anymore. I'm gone. I don't know about you, but I constantly live in fear and have gotten aggressive on, if this thing is not of the quality bar in which we set, every single episode we release is a risk.

David: It's funny. I'm curious what you think. My level of nerves going into every episode has remained constant and steadily increasing for the six years we've been doing this.

Ben: Totally. There’s more on the line every time.

David: Everytime, yup. That was a digression. Fun one.

Ben: Totally. Before we get into grading here, let me thank our friends over at NordVPN. It’s so funny, listeners. You've heard of these folks because they sponsor a ton of stuff. Huge influencers, Casey Neistat, and they've been doing it for years. There's this unbelievable media strategy to partner with lots of creators out there that do stuff.

I just think it's so cool that we get the inside scoop on the company because Tom is a member of Slack. If you didn't hear in the last episode, here's the schtick. Tom Okman is a member of the Acquired community and he's in our Slack, he’s been listening to the show for years. He started NordVPN with some childhood friends in 2012 in Lithuania. Now there's a big tech company based in Lithuania. He let us know between the last episode and this one, they've now grown to a thousand employees worldwide.

They're used by 15 million people and of course as you know, and we've mentioned last time it works on all OSes, it's the worlds' fastest VPN, and I just think it's so cool that there are people like this in our community. Tom's not the only one. There's a ton of folks like this that we get to interact with all the time. I know many of you are thinking about people you've met on LP calls and through Slack. We're just grateful to have the community that we have.

If you are looking for a VPN, look no further. You should sign up at nordvpn.com/acquired by clicking the link on the show notes and you can use the coupon code “acquired” at checkout.

David: That's so great. There's so many stories. Continuing the riff on our tangent of the podcast, we were worried we're going to run out of stories after 10 episodes.

Ben: We did run out of good acquisitions.

David: That's true. But my God, there are stories everywhere and in our community now. It's the best.

Ben: Flywheel spinning. All right, grading. Listeners, we are not LPs in Andreessen Horowitz. If we were, we wouldn't be able to disclose their returns. That said, thanks to our great relationship with the folks at PitchBook data, we were able to pull a ton of stats when they invested, at what rounds, at what valuations. We're able to scan S-1 of all these companies to see if they owned more than 5% at IPO, what they own. We do know how much money they've raised, so we're able to do some napkin math.

Here's the napkin math we've done. We looked at the proceeds from their top 10 liquid outcomes. That may not mean they've actually liquidated their position, but that they could have. I'll just run through them real quick because I think we said some of the numbers earlier, but it's worth highlighting again.

Okta was $1.5 billion to $2 billion back to Andreessen Horowitz. Coinbase, $11 billion, the granddaddy of them all. Airbnb, we estimated around $3.5 billion based on an $85 billion market cap they have IPOed in the last six months so it's reasonable to think they would start liquidating that position now. We think that they own about 4%, there are some 5% shareholders of course on the board.

David: They've led this Series B. I think they put $60+ million in the Series B.

Ben: Yeah, a lot of capital there. Probably 3% or 4% somewhere in here. Lift, they generated about a billion dollars out of PagerDuty, half a billion. Slack, we think about $3 billion assuming they held all the way to the sales force deal 18 months later. Pinterest, $1.5 billion. They own 10% at IPO which is I think a $15 billion market cap but has 3X since then so it depends how much they held.

David: Depends on when they were distributed, yeah.

Ben: It could have been higher. Roblox, a quick $1.2 billion. GitHub, a billion and a firm somewhere between half a billion and a billion. Again, these things are estimated, but if you just look at those companies and think about distributing pretty earlier, assuming that they didn't hold Okta all the way until it's worth $33 billion that it is today, these companies probably generated about $25 billion in returns.

An interesting thing to do is to then look at that divided by the AUM of the funds that they come from. Just to say what's the worst case scenario for their multiple?

David: That's assuming no more value from anything else.

Ben: Which is simply not true and we'll revisit some of the things that could still bear fruit after we do some quick math. You look at their total assets under management, $18.8 billion. But a lot of that doesn't contribute to any of those companies we talked about, so subtract out the early stage funds from 2019 onward because none of those companies haven't returned yet. That's $2.2 billion of the $19 billion.

Then you got to take out their most late stage fund from six months ago which is $3.2 billion. Then you take out at least crypto funds two and three and maybe even take out crypto fund one which is another $350 million. Then you're pulling out from all of that another $2.7–$3 billion. Then you take out all the biotech funds which is $1.4 billion. You're close to $10 billion to subtract out.

David: You could maybe even argue that one or two of the more recent early stage funds to take out as well.

Ben: To make this, again, all napkin math really easy, because we're just trying to figure out did it work? Is it going to work? Is it showing signs of working? Let's just say their first $8 billion, we have some data on, then the most recent $8 billion, the jury is still out, we don't know yet. Time will tell.

If you look at that first eight, that created at least $25 billion which is a cool 3X and you're not even counting, and this could be a monster Databricks which could be worth $20 billion. It wouldn't surprise me if a16z owned 25%. They invested every early and they've been investing every round. They can own $7 billion of that company at the current valuation.

Again, I don't know but this will be a reasonable estimate. Instacart would seem reasonable to think they own $2 billion on that. Robinhood, a small percentage because it's only a seed investor then something more recent in the growth round, but you also have Robinhood, Oculus, Flatiron Health, Stack Overflow, Instagram, which is so funny. They generated $78 million out of Instagram which was a nice return at that time but sort of doesn't matter in this overall analysis today.

That $25 billion number that grossed 3X is even before all of these other companies that definitely contributed and before all the other ones that may have returned capital, may have done it well, but not Coinbase well.

David: There's one more dark horse, too, which is I believe in the crypto funds and maybe some of the early core funds, they're buying Bitcoin and Ether.

Ben: Oh, interesting.

David: I'm almost 100% sure. At least Bitcoin. If not Bitcoin and Ether, they were buying a bunch of these funds.

Ben: Wow. Depending on when they were buying that's game changing depending on how much capital they put in work for all this whole analysis.

David: Yup.

Ben: The reason that I wanted to do this napkin math is to basically say, we know with the first half of the capital they raised in their life. At the very worst case, they had as good returns as anyone else in the top quartile of the industry. At the very worst case, it didn't not work.

David: This is not an F.

Ben: They were able to do a hard thing, which is burst onto the scene and break into something where there is really persistent returns year over year, decade over decade, and compete with the very best of the best. Do we actually give the data to tell you if they're the best in the industry or compare them to Sequoia? It's too hard to do.

Davdi: But it also doesn't really matter. It will be fascinating to know if they're better than Sequoia or better than Benchmark or not, but they're in the ballgame.

Ben: Yeah, and I think we can finally put to bed that leaked data in 2016. It's not that the data was wrong and all, but the conclusion of all people's analyses, for the brand that they have, Andreessen and Horowitz is way under performing. Gosh they're only going at 2X or 2.something and you're like, okay, we don't know yet. If you would analyze Coinbase in 2016, would you have been able to determine that it's going to whatever gigantic multiple was on that fund just from that one company? There's no way you would have been able to.

David: The apples take longer than lemons to ripen. I skipped over that [...] for time, but it was a Wall Street Journal article that was so clearly a headpiece planted by rival venture firms with a bunch of quotes from LPs and stuff. I think the headline of the articles are something like, despite loss or whatever, Andreessen returns are average.

Ben: I don't have much more to add. Frankly, I guess I would throw an A on it, but the plus being if we ever got clearer data. For what a challenge it was to break in and challenge the incumbent in such a short time frame, it's remarkable how well they've done.

David: That's spot on, it's an A. Only reason it's not an A+ is like A+ is Facebook buying Instagram and getting $500 billion of value for one. We just don't know enough yet that maybe it could end up being that in the future, but it's not that today, but no way this is less than an A. Who else did this? Nobody has done this.

Ben: Just to put some numbers. I'm going to guess that the first $8 billion of capital in these funds that were calling inbounds for this analysis returned somewhere between $25 and probably $40-ish billion.

David: It's so good. It's funny like the other navel gazing aspect to venture and investment returns that people talk about all the time is the multiple, the IRRs, efficiency of capital, only having the best company, and blah-blah-blah. Just the magnitude is like at the end of the day, what really matters is the magnitude here.

Ben: Yeah, the absolute dollars.

David: The absolute dollars. They generate, let's make it easy, let's say $30 billion that they've returned on $8 billion invested, that's $22 billion that they've generated. Name other firms who have done that. There are a few, but there are a very very few who have done that.

Ben: It's interesting. Good multiple means you are right, but a great amount of absolute cash returned means you were three things. You were right with conviction, you had winning access to be a meaningful participant on the cap table, and you effectively did the work to obtain the capital in the first place to be able to deploy a large-enough amount of it to generate a large dollar return. You got to be good in a lot of things and you got to be convicted and right in them.

David: I think large institutional LPs, that's how they think about it. They're like yeah, great, 10X funds, fine. If it's a $50 million fund and you 10X and you return $500 million, clap I'm proud of you, but I'm not jumping out of my seat. You return me $22 billion, now I'm jumping out of my seat. I don't care what the multiple is.

Ben: All right. Gosh, it feels good to come to the end of these two parts. Do you want to do carve outs?

David: Yeah. Let's do some carve outs. I got two. First, they're both quasi carve outs. The first one is a quasi carveout because I've already had this author as a recent previous carve out, Arthur C. Clarke. So good. Was it in the Ethereum episode, maybe? I had him as my carveout OG, super OG Science Fiction author. I have since continued to read his stuff and I read Childhood's End. Have you read Childhood's End?

Ben: No.

David: Oh my gosh, it is so good. You got to go read this book. You know the movie Independence Day? The Will Smith movie?

Ben: Absolutely.

David: So great. Independence Day is based on Childhood's End but is only based on the very beginning. The beginning of Childhood's End is what Independence Day is based on, but the rest of the book takes a very very different turn. It's super mind-bending and really cool. Can't recommend it enough. That's number one.

Number two is specifically for you, Ben. I have a carve out for you. We are both huge MKBHD, Marques Brownlee fans, and I think his most recent video, he just launched a new channel on YouTube called THE STUDIO Channel! with the video. You're going to love this because you're such a gear geek. Studio tour, MKBHD's studio tour, oh my God, it's so cool.

Ben: And he's got great gear. I got to go check that out.

David: I was watching and I was both jaws on the floor and I was like, wow, we're so amateurs at Acquired.

Ben: He has a litany of RED cameras.

David: Litany, and wow, videos. I've had so much respect for what YouTubers do. Audio is easy, we're playing on easy mode here.

Ben: It's so much harder for sure. Okay, cool. I'm legitimately adding to my to do list to go watch after. Mine is continuing my recommendation of the Sopranos and Goodfellas, The Godfather. Somehow I have never seen The Godfather trilogy.

David: What?

Ben: It just escaped me. I know. I like going back and actually watching all these.

David: You started with the Sopranos and Goodfellas without having seen The Godfather?

Ben: Correct.

David: Whatever path leads you to greatness, the point is you get to greatness.

Ben: Yes, and greatness it is. God, it is so good. I is so good and raw, and II it's so artistic and well-thought through, and the method of storytelling flashing back and forth between those two stories. I think some people complained about it, I loved it. I think it's De Niro's best performance ever. It's definitely Al Pacino's best performance ever.

David: III exists.

Ben: III, I turned off. Actually I didn't watch III, I watched Coda. People think it's better than III. It's like a reshot. There's some stuff that's reshot, reedited. Maybe if I had 14 years between II and III, then it will be okay, but because I tried to watch them back to back, I was allergic to the ninety-cisms of Coda where I was just like, this is unwatchable. Haircuts alone. I think Michael Corleone says more words in the first 10 minutes of that movie than in the entirety of II.

David: I believe it.

Ben: Just no subtlety.

David: I don't know if I've ever watched III. This is what I hear from everybody.

Ben: I and II are so good.

David: So good. The horse head.

Ben: Ah, it's so beautiful.

David: Just great.

Ben: With that, listeners, thank you to pilot.com, PitchBook, NordVPN. Come join us in Slack. Become an LP. All those links are in the show notes. If you liked this episode, share it with a friend. You can share it on social media, that will be nice, but I actually like the one-to-one better. We're all about the slow, methodical, high-touch growth here at Acquired so if you can put someone you think would really appreciate it, then that's who you should share it with.

David: We love social media shares, of course, but it's kind of hard to just post on social media, like you should listen to this three-and-a-half podcast that is part two of Andreessen Horowitz. You got to convince someone, so if you loved this, tell your friends.

Ben: It's like when I get an Eventbrite invitation to go to something versus when a friend texts me and is like, hey, you should come over for this.

David: Yup, exactly.

Ben: It's a totally different thing. Listeners, we'll see you next time.

David: See you next time and we got one more piece of news. Who Got The Truth? Live on Spotify.

Ben: Go check it out. You can listen to it here for the next two minutes and then go listen on Spotify.

David: Yung Spielburg.

Ben: Mike Taylor, take us out.

David: People, turns out, love the amazon.com episode. That was so awesome. It makes me a little nervous for this one.

Ben: Oh, massively. By far and away, our biggest episode ever. Is this how George Lucas felt when he was doing Empire Strikes Back?

David: You did not just compare us to George Lucas, did you? I swear we're humble.

Ben: All right, let's do this.

Welcome to season 11 episode 3 of Acquired, the podcast about great technology companies and the stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert, and I'm the co-founder and Managing Director of Seattle-based Pioneer Square Labs and our venture fund, PSL Ventures.

David: I'm David Rosenthal. I'm an angel investor based in San Francisco. Cold San Francisco here in August.

Ben: And we are your hosts. All right, David. Let's say you run a lemonade stand. You sell me the highest quality lemonade you can for the lowest price, $1 a cup. When you add up all your costs, the variable ones, like the lemons and the fixed ones, like the table that you rented, it costs about 98½ cents to give me that lemonade. You're happy you returned the profit, I'm sure. But man, you are going to have to sell a lot of lemonade.

David: You're telling me I'm amazon.com in the fourth quarter of 2001, which is actually where we're going to start our story?

Ben: Perhaps, but you discovered something interesting. By making all this lemonade, you get really good at the stuff it takes to run a lemonade business, the perfect cups, ice, and lemons, everything. It turns out, all that stuff that you just got good at, you can sell to other businesses. Guess what? You realize further that when you sell your services to other companies, when you charge them $1, it only costs you 70¢ to make it. So 30% margins, instead of something like 1.5%. You have to sell a lot less of those services than you ever did on lemonade to make the same amount of money.

David: If you told me that, I would dig into it even further. I would realize that the existing companies that sold stands, cups, and whatnot, were actually making 70% margins on their stands and cups. I would be quite happy to take 30% margins and disrupt them and still do better than my lemonade business.

Ben: Listeners, of course, on our last episode, we talked about Amazon's retail business. Today, we are talking about Amazon Web Services, the cloud computing pioneer. Those margin percentages that I just used are the real ones for the retail business and for AWS.

AWS's revenue is only about 15% the size of Amazon's massive retail business, but their profits or the operating income, to be specific, from AWS, are in total the same, if not more than their ecommerce store. I think it's the case that every year since 2015, when they started breaking out AWS's financials, the total operating income from AWS has actually been bigger than the retail business.

David: There may have been some quarters where it was off. But generally, that trend is accurate.

Ben: Wild. We're going to talk about a completely different type of business today than we talked about last time. Sort of. There are a lot of similarities and a lot more than you would guess when looking at an online retailer that started as an online bookstore and a cloud computing pioneer.

Speaking of ecommerce, we have huge news. You can finally, finally buy Acquired merch on the Internet. That is available acquired.fm/store or click the link in the show notes. You can grab your favorite tee, crewneck, hoodie, tank, or even a onesie, since I know a lot of you out there are like David and have little ones at home.

For our presenting sponsor on this episode, we have a company that we are very excited about, Fundrise. Our amazon.com episode, they shared some news about a fascinating new product they have called the Fundrise Innovation Fund that enables their customers not only to invest in real estate, but also now, private late-stage growth tech companies, which is of course a very interesting place to be investing right now now that prices are very different than they were 6 and 12 months ago. We are back today with Ben Miller, CEO and co-founder of Fundrise.

David: We know that you've been personally loving dissecting investing markets from first principles, and you've been noodling on how to disrupt VC for a while. Tell us why you think growth VC, in the traditional sense, is broken and why what you're doing with retail investing in private companies is the future.

Benjamin: When you want to start a big business, you find a big problem and you find something that's broken. Twenty percent of the upside of a company's success goes to the people who work at the VC fund, 20% of carried interest. Who creates the value? People who build the company and people who invest in the company.

The team, in my view, creates value. They put in 2500 hours a year. How many hours does a typical VC put into a company? 150? It's like 2% of what a typical employee does. What happens when a sector is overcompensated or overpaid? It gets overcrowded, it gets overfunded, and it gets undisciplined.

When you look at 2021, you can see it in what's happening in venture. Because it's overcompensating, it's basically gotten messed up. We basically created the Fundrise Innovation Fund with the idea of eliminating carried interest, give it back to the team, give it back to employees.

Obviously, capital deserves a good return for taking the risk, but 20% of that return shouldn't necessarily going to GPS who didn't actually put up the money and didn't actually do the work. In the long-term, markets get more efficient. Probably those returns get split between the investors and the team members.

Our mission is basically to lower the fees of the intermediaries and increase the benefits to the people who are taking the risk of doing the work. That is really (I think) the future of venture. It's like a nightmare for the venture guys.

The worst thing could ever happen to them is to lose their 20% carried interest. It's the most disruptive thing we could do if you think about us being a disruptor. But yet, the future of markets is markets becoming more efficient. The vast majority of public stock managers do not take 20% carried interest if not justified by the efficiency of the market.

When the venture industry started 30-40 years ago, that market was inefficient, there was very little money and it was justified. As the markets got much, much larger—huge—all the data, every company, it's all available to anybody, it's just not justified anymore. You can do the job and still have a successful amount of profits without taking the 20% carried interest.

The biggest public asset manager is BlackRock, and you don't see them taking a carried interest rate .They have an AUM fee by having really good, efficient systems and scale. They're a great business. Structure and incentives dictate behavior. It's like what Charlie Munger says, so we're trying to restructure the whole venture industry.

Ben: Our thanks to Fundrise, the largest private investment platform in the world for retail investors. If you want to join the over 350,000 individuals investing with Fundrise, you can click the link in the show notes. If you're a founder and you want to get in touch about having the Innovation Fund to participate in your next funding round, email notvc@fundrise.com.

After you finish this episode, comment, discuss it with David and I and 13,000 other smart members of the Acquired community at acquired.fm/slack. If you're dying for more required in the meantime, go check out the LP Show by searching Acquired LP in any podcast player.

The next episode is with David's partner in crime at Kindergarten Ventures, Nat Manning, talking about his company Kettle and how the business of reinsurance works. That, of course, is already live if you are a paying LP, which you can become acquired.fm/lp.

Without further ado, David, take us in. Listeners, as always, the show is not investment advice. David and I may certainly have investments in the companies we discuss. The show is for informational and entertainment purposes only.

David: We left off the amazon.com episode in 2007 with the Sony PlayStation-like coda of the Kindle story. The new chapter, one might say that it seemed at the time to the outside world that Amazon was opening as a true technology company with Kindle. I believe the quote from Eric Schmidt in The Everything Store was, "The book guys finally got technology." Of course, as we talked about, Jeff Bezos always got technology. This was not a shift.

In particular, this was not anything new because of everything we are going to talk about on this whole separate episode today. To do that, we need to rewind back, as I said above, to the end of 2001, early 2002, the immediate post dot-com bubble popping crash era.

Bezos and Amazon, as hard as it is now to remember, he was like an embattled CEO at this point. It just gotten rid of COO Joe Galli, the board has brought in coach Campbell, Amazon's fighting for its life against both eBay and Wall Street.

Ben: Is it insane to think that the board was in the place with Jeff Bezos thinking, we really need some adult supervision to be a scale CEO and help this guy out? Freaking Jeff Bezos. Obviously, that did not pan out. Bezos came valiantly riding back in and ran the business for another 20 years.

David: Another 20 years until handing the reins to somebody else who we're going to spend a lot of time in just a little bit here talking about, of course, current Amazon CEO, Andy Jassy.

I don't even know what the right word is to use to describe AWS. I wrote behemoth in my notes.

Ben: Pioneer, inventor.

David: I don't think there's anything you can say that captures how big and how important AWS is. It is one of the biggest and most important businesses, technologies, products of the modern world.

Ben: No doubt.

David: I don't think it's controversial to say even much more so than amazon.com.

Ben: It's interesting. During the pandemic, you could argue that amazon.com was more important, because everybody needed to buy goods and get them at home.

David: But everybody also needed to be on the Internet, and the Internet runs on AWS. Today, we're going to tell that story. It's funny. As we did the research, there's no Everything Store book dedicated to AWS. There are a lot of very disparate resources and stories out there. There actually are quite a few conflicting and competing stories about what the true origin is of AWS. You might say it has a cloudy origin. See what we did there?

Ben: It is true. As we were doing the research note, of course, David and I read both of Brad Stone's excellent books, I watched the PBS Frontline documentary, which of course, is a very specific angle that they're trying to take on the company. When you read any of these Amazon analysis pieces, they're like 95% about the retail business. They'll talk about things like the relationship with employees and the big New York Times piece that came out in 2015.

They'll talk about the relationship with the warehouse workers, or was this good for the world? Everyone indexes on that which is important and deserves all the attention it's got, but almost none of these spend a material amount of time on AWS other than mostly an apocryphal founding story, which is not even really how it happened.

David: We identified you're referring to one origin story of AWS. We identified not one, not two, not three, but four separate origin stories. We're going to tell them all here. I think there is something important to learn about what AWS is, about Amazon, and about Amazon culture in all of these.

Let's start with the first and most obviously, untrue one, which is ironically also the one that the layperson believes the most.

Ben: Yes, because it's tempting. It's like an, oh. It's too convenient.

David: Yes. That story is the excess capacity narrative. The way this story goes is that right around this time, 2001, 2002, 2003, amazon.com (the retail business), like all retail businesses in America (at least) is highly seasonal. They have huge spikes of traffic and demand in Q4 for the holiday shopping season. That's when the largest share of any quarter revenue happens in Q4.

Ben: So much so that for the first (at least) five years of the business, there was a rule in November and December that you could not commit new code to production.

David: That's right.

Ben: It was so all hands on deck that no new features were allowed unless it was a red flag bug fix.

David: We didn't talk about this in the amazon.com episode, but for years, and years, and years, the executive team, the business side of the company, and the engineers, everybody would go work in the warehouses in Q4.

Ben: That or customer service. Oh, how times have changed. Can you imagine someone sitting down in day one north or Doppler being told that they have to go pick and pack for a while?

David: I think for a while, they continued to do it even when it wasn't necessary just like a culture thing. Obviously, those days are gone now. The urban legend is that because of this dynamic, Amazon had this brilliant realization around, again, when they were trying to achieve profitability, that they had excess technical infrastructure capacity in their IT operations during quarters one through three.

They had to build out for the peak demand of Q4, all the traffic on the website, all the transactions happening, but the rest of the year, all that capacity was just sitting there. They decided, let's rent out that capacity to other developers. Brilliant, brilliant. We're going to turn a large expense line in the business into a revenue line.

Ben: Magic. Of course, this falls down into enormous places. One is, if you've ever been inside a pre-cloud technology company, you know that...

David: It doesn't work that way.

Ben: Yeah, you can't just say like, oh, cool, the servers aren't in use right now, there's nothing highly customized about these servers, and they're not tightly coupled to our applications in any way. We'll just make it so that anyone can very easily just run their applications on it. There's enough security setup correctly so that anyone can just get access to our data center.

The network hardware understands how to serve other tenants other than us. None of that existed and none of that was true. There's just no way you can be like, oh, yeah, other companies just started using our infrastructure, and it was pretty rip and replace.

David: In the pre-cloud infrastructure world, you installed your software, your codebase, on your servers that you owned. The amazon.com codebase was literally installed on a bunch of boxes that they owned. You couldn't just rent out the capacity.

Ben: Until 2000, they were servers from Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC). They were DEC Alpha servers. These were unbelievably high margin servers that, I believe, leased from the manufacturer. It was the same business model that IBM had forever and Oracle has or had forever, where you get this highly bundled hardware and software platform that you would use to run your applications.

They would make 80% gross margins on these things. There's a massive markup. They were monolithic. To be honest, the thing that really changed all this was Linux. When Linux came out and you could do the stuff that you used to need Unix workstations for on an open-source operating system, then everything changed, because you can go buy a whole bunch of different hardware, put Linux on it, and then write your own applications.

This laid the groundwork for maybe infrastructure doesn't have to be as insanely expensive. All the profit pools from all of this infrastructure don't have to be captured by (say) a DEC, an oracle, or an IBM. This would lay the groundwork for a lot of things to come, including, frankly, just saving Amazon as a company.

In 2000, they almost went out of business because they were so tight on cash. They were spending so much on infrastructure that this moved to the open-source ecosystem and doing a massive rewrite of all of amazon.com to run on Linux and—they did this big deal with HP—run on HP servers.

David: Right, rather than DEC.

Ben: That, frankly, saved the company from a cost perspective during that really tight time.

David: But that is not virtualized cloud servers. It's not what we're talking about with AWS. Here's the other reason why this excess capacity myth is a myth.

Ben: How is Amazon supposed to serve their AWS customers if all of them are in excess capacity during Q4 at all? Let's say I'm Netflix, and I just took a dependency, and all of my streaming is happening on AWS. Is Amazon just going to tell me I can't do it during Q4 when they need the servers? It's ridiculous.

David: No holiday movies. Can't watch Die Hard at Christmas.

Ben: Is a very convenient narrative when someone's trying to solve the puzzle of, how did this internet retailer turned into a real technology company? Oh, they had all these extra servers dispelled.

David: The best and final word on this that we have to put here, because it literally is from part of the horse's mouth itself, it comes from Werner Vogels' at the time AWS CTO now CTO of all of Amazon, who wrote flat out in a Quora post in 2011, "The excess capacity story is a myth. It was never a matter of selling excess capacity. Actually, within two months after launch, AWS would have already burned through the excess amazon.com capacity. Amazon Web Services was always considered a business by itself with the expectation that it could even grow as big as the amazon.com retail operation." Maybe.

Ben: The other interesting thing to point out is he doesn't give Amazon enough credit about their intentionality and strategy.

David: It short sells Amazon.

Ben: Yeah, they had this extra capacity, this cost center that they were using. Two things. One, technology was never a cost center for Amazon. They never looked at it like, oh, we have an IT department. They always thought about themselves as a technology company. It was always thinking about, okay, in 18 months Moore's Law is going to make it so we have twice as much compute. What crazy cool stuff can we do with that? They always looked at technology as an investment, not a cost center.

The other thing, to your point that it sells them short on is as if this wasn't an intentional strategy. This was an incredibly intentional strategy in a brand new business school case study type, laser focused on an emerging market, that they had reason to believe that they could create.

David: That's origin story number one. Origin story number two, we're going to get into this a lot more. I didn't even really realize before diving into this, the depth of innovation of what AWS was, what Amazon was doing, and led them to it, is so beyond anything else that was happening at the time.

This is a true fundamental innovation, so let's get into it. Remember from the Kindle-Acoda vignette, how it was one of those crazy stories about, who was responsible for the inspiration for the Kindle? It turned out it was Tesla founder, Martin Eberhard.

Ben: It's crazy. He had invented the first ereader that wasn't quite viable yet, and tried to sell it to Amazon, and tried to get investment from Amazon. Amazon said, no, we'll wait till the world shifts a little bit, different technology. It's actually something we can own outright rather than funding and potentially having competitors use, too. Of course, that would be a few years later, and Amazon would create the Kindle internally.

David: There is a similar figure involved in inspiring the vision for AWS, and that is Tim O'Reilly. For anybody of a certain age, you certainly remember the O'Reilly programming books, the O'Reilly conferences, and in particular, for me, they were the organization and Tim as the leader of the organization, championed the whole idea of Web 2.0.

Ben: For sure. I remember first reading (I think) the PHP book that they put out. When Web 2.0, this idea of, I can consume on the web but also I can post on the web, and that led to social media, and one of the key enabling technologies in all that is Ajax. I remember reading the O'Reilly Ajax book of, wow, I can use Asynchronous JavaScript and XML to make dynamic web pages without needing to refresh. That was truly magical at the time.

David: There were a few core tenets that they defined as what Web 2.0 meant. Part of it was in opposition to Web 1.0, which they considered static. Web 2.0 was dynamic like you're saying, but that wasn't all of it.

Another huge part of what they meant by Web 2.0 was what they called participatory culture and interoperability. They meant that both users on websites could interact with the website. If you got Flickr, you would upload your photos. You would interact and change the website. Or Google Maps, of course, it was such a canonical Web 2.0 project. But even more than users interoperating and interacting with Web 2.0 sites, was other developers. Remember mashups, Ben?

Ben: Like mashing up APIs?

David: Yes. Web 2.0 mashups were such all the rage. Google Maps was like a core part of this. People would take the Google Maps' API and build all sorts of other websites using Google Maps data and content underneath it, or Flickr had an API. It was APIs, it was interoperability, it was anybody can access. It's democratizing what we've built.

Ben: Totally. It's so funny to hear all the crypto people today talk about composability. I feel like the old man yelling from a tree or get off my lawn person, but it is very clear that people did not experience the 2006–2010 era of the exact same promise. Instead of smart contracts or composability on blockchains, people were saying it's a RESTful API, it has CRUD operations to create, read, update, or delete things on a service.

If you're authenticated, then you don't need to necessarily use a web UI. You can just use the API, you can upload a photo programmatically, or you can fetch your entire list of tweets programmatically. All the web, instead of being in these siloed applications was magically free for data to move about in a utopian way without anybody's capitalist intentions getting in the way and siloing the data all to themselves.

David: In the early days of all this—I think it was early 2002—Tim O'Reilly flies up to Seattle and meets with Jeff Bezos. The reason he wants to come see Jeff, they've had a checkered history in the past. O'Reilly has not always been the biggest fan of Amazon. He's a book publisher, obviously, so he has some feelings. He wants to make the pitch to Jeff that Amazon should embrace Web 2.0 and transform amazon.com into a participatory website.

Ben: This is a great idea. Being a Web 2.0 company means that you can do business with other companies without needing a BD agreement in place. You don't actually need a partnership agreement. You basically can just publish your API. You can say, pay as you go, here's how you pay, and here's how you get an account. We can shut down your account if we need, but you can get API access to do business with us programmatically through this application programming interface.

It's great. Maybe no one or two companies will ever even need to talk to each other, which means you can do business with thousands of companies out there, not just a few that your BD people cherry pick.

David: Yes. Jeff totally gets it. He gets this in so many ways. Amazon.com has this obvious business use case for APIs and allowing other developers and other websites to access data and content from amazon.com, which is they have a giant affiliate program that's called the Amazon Associates Program.

Ben: And they've got a catalog of every uniquely identifiable product in the world, certainly in the media space, but at this time, growing into many other categories, too. Wouldn't it be nice to access that authoritative catalog to fetch an image and display that image on my website if I'm trying to tell people, hey, go buy this CD?

David: Display the CD right there and then share the revenue with Amazon.

Ben: It's good for both of us if I can do that.

David: After this meeting, Jeff does two things. One, he completely embraces this idea of Tim O'Reilly. He invites him up regularly to Seattle, has him speak at all hands within the company, evangelize this idea of Web 2.0 and APIs within Amazon.

Two, he starts a new team within Amazon to do just what Tim is suggesting. They build API's that let any website developer plug into the amazon.com product catalog, do everything you just said, Ben, and the stated goal and mission of this team is to make amazon.com API's available to developers and "let them surprise us with what they build."

That same year—this is Amazon; they move fast—they hold a conference for developers. In 2002 a total of eight people attend the conference. They announced to the world the launch of this new division within Amazon that is called Amazon Web Services.

Ben: To your point here, this is not an important thing in the world yet. Amazon having a developer conference with eight people there, and you look at re:Invent now, I think it has 100,000 people who watch the keynote. A very different world.

David: Yes, a very different world and a very different product. This is called Amazon Web Services, but it is the hot cloud-based IT infrastructure. It's other developers using the amazon.com product catalog. Indeed, Amazon Web Services lives within the Amazon Associates Program.

That is run by a guy named Collin Brier, which is very, very fun, because Collin goes on to do many things, including recently co-authoring the book, Working Backwards, which is a great book we used for a source in both this episode and the previous episode on amazon.com. In 2002, Collin technically becomes the first head of AWS.

Ben: Wow, and it was just within Amazon Associates at this point, because the whole point in this origin story, the scope of the ambition of AWS, was to make available assets of amazon.com to our affiliates, to Amazon Associates, who want to basically fetch images and items from the catalog and have that information passed along when someone purchases something to share some revenue. That was the scope of the ambition based on where it lived in the organization.

David: All of that is absolutely true. There is no element of myth or falsehood to anything in the second origin story here. Now we'll transition from number two to number three together, but what I think is so important about number two, even though it leads to AWS, that is the creation of AWS but not the AWS we know and love, it's this idea of Web 2.0 and APIs that really starts to take hold, at least in Jeff Bezos' mind.

Ben: And we have not once, in this story, said the phrase cloud computing or the cloud. We've said web services. I think people today have heard AWS so many times that they forget that it's a little bit of a misnomer. It's still called Amazon Web Services, but the vast majority of what is happening when customers are paying the ludicrous amount of revenue to Amazon to access AWS is not web services. It is not these RESTful API endpoints that you use to fetch and post information.

David: Fun sidebar. Do you know the origin of the term ‘cloud’ as applied to IT infrastructure?

Ben: Oh, I do not.

David: This is so cool. It started at General Magic.

Ben: Really?

David: Yeah. How crazy is that? The Apple spin out that invented the iPhone, 20 years before the iPhone. As part of what they were doing, they also wanted to have—the Internet barely existed, so I don't think they thought of it as the Internet—a distributed, always accessible back end, IT infrastructure for all the services that we're going to be on the mobile device. They started calling what they built for that, a cloud infrastructure, that the devices could access.

Ben: General Magic was a pioneer in so many ways. It's amazing.

David: It's such a pioneer. Okay, back now to Amazon. They've launched Amazon Web Services, Web 2.0, blah-blah-blah. That's cool, but that's not what anybody is really focused on at Amazon. They're focused on a lot of problems within the company.

Arguably, the biggest problem is that the codebase of amazon.com that Shel Kaphan designed back in 1995, has been amazing. He made so many great technical decisions that we talked about on the amazon.com episode.

He designed it for how websites were built in 1995, which was small teams, not at scale, and monolith software codebases, everything we talked about in the beginning of the episode. All of amazon.com, at this point, when it's now a multi billion dollar company, is running on one monolithic software codebase.

Ben: I do know, after talking to some folks who are early Amazon engineers, around the summertime, they would start looking at, what is the server that would be available on the market going into Q4 that is the baddest ass thing we could possibly buy? They would just buy the most expensive, souped up server they possibly could from DEC or whoever else, and they would just try to make it through Christmas.

David: Yes. Amazon would do code freezes going into the holidays. Think about this. This is just so far until everything we think about with technology companies now and how things run. It's all thanks to AWS.

You had to do a code freeze heading into the holidays, because as you were adding new features, new elements, and new teams, remember, Amazon at this point, they've got A9, they're working on search, Lab26 is just starting up and getting going, they've got all of these teams, huge numbers of engineers and product managers that are building features, adding features needing to access various parts of the site. Anytime you add one of those to the monolith software codebase, it could break everything, so you had to do a code freeze.

Remember, Amazon as a company now, is trying to focus on profitability and efficiency. It gets to the point where the company just literally grinds to a halt. There is a lot of good stuff in the Working Backwards book about how hard it became to get anything done and built at Amazon because of this rat's nest of complexities involved on the technical and infrastructure side.

Ben: As we're articulating problems here that are happening, one of them is of course, you're going to tip the server over if you add any additional complexity. The other of which is Amazon is doing the Amazon thing and they're trying to enter new businesses and new categories. They're trying to grow.

They're trying to grow because the way that they've designed the business, as we mentioned in the last episode, the cashflow.com idea, where they're spending supplier money to grow before they're paying suppliers. Basically, they're investing the float in growth. They do have to keep growing because they have bills coming due. They're continuing to look for new categories to expand into. They're looking around. They're seeing competition everywhere. They're just trying to get big fast.

You have the issue of, well, we don't want to get more code and tip the server over, which of course, means you can't launch these new businesses, you can't continue to grow, and you can't bring on more customers because more customers is more traffic, which is also going to tip the server over.

David: Let's just take one incredibly illustrative example—the marketplace business. When Amazon figured that out, that was transformative. That was high margin revenue. That was how they competed with eBay. Technically, to do that, they had to re-architect to help the buy button work on the website. Imagine, with a monolithic software codebase, what was involved in that?

Ben: You just get so slow in your actual software development, therefore slow to ship, and therefore slow to innovate, because you're afraid of, uh-oh, what did this other team commit to the codebase here? What does that assume? Can I trust the contract that this function had is still true, or did someone update this function in a way that was tightly coupled to the requirement that they had for their thing?

Before you know it, the code is making a bunch of assumptions all over the place. If you go try to change anything, it's also brittle. You basically need to talk to a bunch of people before you're ever editing code because you might break something.

David: Yes. This is not just Amazon, this is every internet company. The first companies to get to this scale were Amazon, who was this time, there were no internet companies of this scale before. Everybody is realizing you run into this brick wall just from a complexity standpoint when you reach a certain scale.

This is a huge problem. Jeff is so focused on this. Not only Jeff, his new assistant at this time, is focused on this. His new technical assistant, who is at this point in time, Andy Jassy who was the first. A lot of listeners maybe don't know about this, but anybody familiar with Amazon or who worked at Amazon knows Jeff's shadow. That's a legendary role to have.

Ben: Which was a Microsoft thing before. Bill Gates' TA was the blueprint for this.

David: Technical assistant, exactly. The reason that Jassy becomes Jeff's first shadow is Jassy was a Harvard MBA, he had been a product line launcher, he had launched music for Amazon, he ended up in the marketing department after that. And then 2000–2001, dot-com crash, Amazon acts as the whole marketing department. We're not doing ads anymore, we got to get profitable.

Jassy was going to get laid off with the whole department, but Jeff liked him. Jeff said, I'm going to save Andy. He's not going to get laid off. I'm going to find something for him to do. While we're figuring this out, let's take this technical assistant idea from Microsoft. He can come to be my shadow, and he creates the role for him.

Ben: Andy's background is not technical up until this point. He becomes the technical assistant. He's brilliant, but he came in as one of the MBAs who was a category launcher when they were figuring out music, electronics, and all these different verticals that they were going into. I can't remember which one Andy launched, but he was the launcher for music for one of those. I think, fairly recently, within the last five years before this, he had considered a career in the sports industry.

David: Oh, yeah. He wanted to be a sportscaster.

Ben: Yeah, he's like a well known sports nut, has this basement tricked out as a sports bar, and almost took that career path. We're not talking about a distinguished engineer at Amazon who's taking this technical advisor role, because they're this technical luminary. It's a really smart guy who's just a very malleable, facile person.

David: It was just an excuse to keep Andy in the company and give him a job. This is now the biggest problem in the company that Jeff has focused on and that Andy's focused on. This is where all these threads come together. I'm just in awe thinking about this.

If I were looking at this problem of my technical, infrastructure to grind to a halt, we can't ship anything, communication is so hard in the company, the natural thing to do, and I think what most companies would do and did try to do at this point in time, is, okay, we got to improve our communication. We need better coordination loops, more communication, tighter communication, more coordination between teams. We need to build out our engineering management discipline here. We need to build out our processes. We're going to get really efficient to be able to solve this complexity challenge.

Ben: At Microsoft, when they encountered this problem a decade or two earlier, they invented the program management role. That was basically the responsibility. It was twofold. There are not enough unicorn people out there who are 10X developers and also unbelievable communicators, so we'll just hire communication mouthpieces for the 10X developers. We can recruit these four sigma, IQ engineer type people, typically terrible communicators.

Let's just attach a PM to every dev or a PM to every 2–5 devs. That way, they'll have communication associated with what they're doing. All the PMs can talk to each other, they can figure out what's happening between these two teams, then they both go write specs, the engineers write their engineering documents, and then boom, we're off to the races. The PMs can just keep talking it out to make sure that we're all on the same page.

David: I don't know this. You were one of these people.

Ben: That was my job. Yeah.

David: Was the Microsoft PM program—it was program management, not product management—was that the origin of the modern Silicon Valley product manager?

Ben: It is specifically the origin of program management. Microsoft considers product management a marketing function. It's owned in the marketing or again, as much more, go to market oriented, or as Microsoft's program manager, is in the engineering org. It's on the same comp ladder and same promotion ladder as engineering.

David: We have fun, maybe special to do with somebody of like, let's trace the history of PM in tech and Silicon Valley.

Ben: And let's be specific about what the P stands for there, since it can be very different things.

David: Yeah. Okay, that's what most companies would do, even incredibly successful, brilliant, smart companies and founders like Microsoft, Bill Gates, et cetera. That is not what Jeff and Andy decided to do.

Ben: How about less communication?

David: How about no communication? This is where, though Tim O'Reilly Web 2.0 influence comes to play in such a bigger way for Amazon and for the Internet, Jeff has been exposed here (and Andy, too, as his TA), to this concept of Web 2.0, this concept of APIs. Jeff just makes this incredible leap and says, we should use APIs internally.

If we make everything a "hardened interface" was the Amazon term for this. hardened API interface, we can blow up all of this. We're going to say, no communication. You cannot talk to anybody. Everything you do, internally, must be done via APIs, that then anybody else can access whatever they want. They don't have to talk to you.

Ben: It makes sense. If you are thinking about your company like an entrepreneurial organization or perhaps better put a group of individual startups all operating in a very nimble, entrepreneurial way, then you should think about them as separate companies. If all the startups out there are communicating with each other without a BD person, and they're all just pinging each other's APIs, commerce is flowing, and things are getting built, maybe that's the right internal model, too, for the modern next generation type of company.

David: Academically, thinking around this was in process. I think Amazon is really the first company that did this in practice. This comes to be called service-oriented architecture. Instead of a monolithic codebase software architecture, service-oriented architecture is this. Every small team, every individual feature is its own architecture, completely separate from everything else.

Ben: And it's worth teasing out. One is a human cultural thing, which is basically trying to reduce the issue of Metcalfe's Law, where every time you introduce a new person, there becomes an n-squared relationship to all the people that they could communicate to within the organization. This is like an exponentially worse issue as more people join the company.

There's this cultural element that you're talking about there. The services-oriented architecture thing is the engineering counterpart to that same mental model of, okay, well, now we actually are going to build each one of these things as a completely separate application that then all interact to create the user phasing thing.

David: Yup, via APIs. There is a legendary post about this. This is one of the top all-time posts in the history of the Internet.

Ben: Is it the Steve Yegge?

David: This is the Stevie Yegge rant. Then Google engineer at the time, this post happened much later. About this period in time at Amazon, he had been working at Amazon at this time and then moved over to Google later. Shout out to Jeremy Diamond in the Acquired Slack for reminding us about this.

Ben: The funniest thing is the way that this got public, by the way, is he was at Google, and they had just launched Google+. He meant to post it internally, but it turned into an external Google+ public thing. It obviously went viral, because if you hear, this person meant to email their own internal organization. Instead, they leaked it out on the Internet because the product is so poorly designed that this person who was working on the product could not determine the difference between internal posting and external posting. That is just catnip.

David: The meta story to this post is just as good as the actual post itself. It just illustrates the difference between Google culture and Amazon culture so clearly. He starts off just bashing on Amazon culture. They don't care, but he talks about the hardened interface, that that's how Amazon thought about things. He talks about Rick Dalzell.

I don't think we mentioned in the previous episode, Rick was an army ranger before going to work at Walmart. He would just terrorize everybody, all the developers. He himself was a hardened interface, Amazon is so terrible, Bezos is so terrible, they're so mean, and blah-blah-blah-blah-blah, all this stuff.

It's all just a warm up to the main point of the post, which is where he says, look. Amazon gets everything wrong. We're better at everything at Google, but there's one thing. There's one very, very, very important thing that Amazon kicks our ass in. It's this.

Ben: I think this is 2010-ish to anchor this time period.

David: Yeah, 2010–2011. It was whenever Google+ launched, so that feels about right. Steve writes that Jeff—and Andy is part of this—sent a memo out to the whole company at Amazon. It was a big mandate. "Jeff's big mandate went something along these lines. (1) All teams will henceforth expose their data and functionality through service interfaces.

(2) Teams must communicate with each other through these interfaces.

(3) There will be no other form of inter process communication allowed. No direct linking, no direct reads of another team's data store, no shared memory model, no backdoors, whatsoever. The only communication allowed is via service interface calls over the network.

(4) It doesn't matter what technology they use—HTTP, Cobra, PubSub, custom protocols, it doesn't matter. Bezos doesn't care.

(5) All service interfaces without exception, must be designed from the ground up to be externalizable. That is to say, the team must plan and design to be able to expose the interface to developers in the outside world. No exceptions.

(6) Anyone who doesn't do this will be fired.

(7) Thank you, have a nice day.” He's like, of course, for everybody who used to work at Amazon, you know he didn't say thank you have a nice day, because he's so mean.

Ben: This is crazy at the time. If you think about this edict, I remember building web applications in the late 2000s. Of course, I was writing PHP and querying a MySQL database.

If you told me, oh, yeah, you can't query the MySQL database, even though you have access to it and even though it's owned by your company, you instead have to use this API. It'll go ping this web service, which has permission to directly interact with the database. I'd be like, what, are you kidding me? It'd be so much easier for me to just… and the answer's no, you will be fired.

David: It's funny. We thought a lot about it in this episode. How do we tell this story for non-technical members of our audience without getting too much into technical weeds? This is all pretty technical now, but I don't think we can avoid it. This is so important.

The context here is let's zoom back out from service-oriented architecture, APIs, and all this. What's really going on here? What's really going on here is this is the beginning of focus on what makes your beer taste better. All of this junk we're talking about, all this technical junk, it's technical junk from the perspective of what actually matters as a business.

What matters as a business is the customer experience, new features, customer satisfaction, revenue, and profits. All of this junk was getting in the way. This is where Jeff has this realization of none of that makes the beer taste better. Let's standardize, get rid of all communication, API-assize, all of it, and then everybody here can spend all of their time just focusing on new features to make the beer taste better on amazon.com.

Ben: Yup. The other thing that it is is a very Amazonian concept of documentation. Of course, they start all these meetings with the six-pagers and the PR/FAQs. We're not doing PowerPoint slides. We're just working backwards from this document of what the customer will actually experience.

APIs are a heavily documentation-oriented way of computing. When I'm hitting your API endpoint, there is a strictly documented set of requirements of things I can send you and ways in which you send information back. Whereas if I'm allowed to communicate directly with your database, you and I can have a little conversation, you can tell me like, oh, yeah, that field, we stopped using for this purpose and started using for this other purpose, so just keep that in mind.

There's no keep that in mind in APIs. There's, when you hit this thing, you will get that thing back. It brings this true precision hardened belief in the way in which that thing will respond when I hit it that is documented and you must keep the documentation up to date with the way it actually performs.

David: While we're talking here about this earth-shattering realization of focus on what makes your beer taste better and turn into API infrastructure that which doesn't, I think we should talk about our second sponsor of this episode and all of season 11. One of our very favorite longtime companies in the Acquired family, pilot.com.

Pilot sets up and operates your entire financial stack as a startup and a growing company, including finance, accounting, tax, even higher-level CFO services like investor reporting, all of which you would otherwise be mucking around yourself in either as a founder or hiring somebody on your team to do. Don't do that. It does not make your product better. It does not make your beer taste better.

Ben: There are many of you out there who are opening QuickBooks when you shouldn't be, so don't. You know you'll feel guilty when you're doing it. You're like, I shouldn't be doing this, but I am doing this. Call Pilot.

David: I should probably be thinking about my customers. Instead, I'm...

Ben: Spending the Saturday reconciling?

David: Yes. For the vast majority of companies and especially startups, doing it yourself as a founder, terrible use of your time, hiring your own deep finance team, also probably a terrible use of your limited venture capital or bootstrap resources. Instead, you should just go on over to Pilot. They take all of that headache off your plate as a founder.

What's cool is we're talking about APIs here. It's not only that pilot has teams of expert accountants and financial professionals who can do your books and your financial reporting for you. They also are a technology company run on APIs.

Today, fast forward, the legacy of everything AWS creates here is Stripe, it's Plaid, it's Modern Treasury. So much of your financial stack as a company these days and your revenue runs on API-based services. Pilot integrates with them.

Good luck having a traditional accounting firm to be able to do that. Pilot integrates with Stripe, Brex, Gusto, Shopify, Square, you name it, and they take all of that data right into your financial stack directly.

Ben: Importantly, you can just count on the fact that they're going to keep integrating with whatever the next leading edge financial thing is. Whereas I think for a lot of people, if you say, oh, they have Shopify integration, well, sure. But they're probably not a company full of engineers that is looking for the next Shopify to make sure that they integrate with at the deepest level.

David: Pilot co-founders and good friends, Waseem, Jessica, and Jeff, are all MIT engineers. This is their third startup. They sold their last startup to Dropbox. They very much know what they're doing on a technical front. This is, frankly, just a brilliant idea and piece of infrastructure that I'm so glad exists.

For everything, as we always say, relevant to this episode, Jeff Bezos himself is an investor in the company alongside Sequoia, Index, and many, many other great VCs. Thanks to Waseem and crew.

Everybody in the Acquired community, if you use Pilot, go on over to pilot.com/acquired. Sign up there. If you use that link, you will get 20% off your first six months of service.

Ben: Thanks, Pilot.

David: Thanks, Pilot. You guys are the best.

Ben: All right, we're in story number three at this point. (1) The apocryphal got some extra hardware lying around. (2) This idea that Tim O'Reilly brings up web 2.0 and APIs, so they start working on the Amazon Associates API. (3) This idea of, okay, the organization is moving too slow, and a way to speed it up internally just for our own step one internal use case, is make it so that the teams communicate with each other via API.

Once they start doing that, and obviously, before Steve Yegge writes his rant and publishes on the Internet, they start realizing, okay, they are parts of this where it may make sense to start being external-facing, because once we get this stuff right, and we've toiled around in the darkness so much trying to get this stuff, right, and I don't think it's helping our customers at all, maybe there are other people out there who are experiencing the same blunt force trauma just trying to keep their infrastructure up and modern.

David: There's one more small compared to the big ideas but inevitable as things were going. One more leap that we should talk about that happens here. everything we just described so far in AWS origin story number three, is related to software engineering and the amazon.com codebase.

What AWS is is abstracted hardware IT infrastructure. And software, too. But the core like S3, EC2, that's IT infrastructure. How do you get from transforming your software architecture to, oh, now I need cloud IT infrastructure? It's the same problem. It's an inevitable outcome.

When you transition your software architecture to the service-oriented architecture and no longer a monolithic codebase, IT used to centrally plan, like we were talking about. We can ship these features at these times, we need a code freeze at that time, we need X capacity, we can forecast that, and we can look out into the future. Now with this, you've got all these distributed teams doing God knows what without talking to anybody, IT can't centrally plan anymore.

What Amazon realizes is they need to do the same thing with IT that they did with software engineering, which is transform it also into an API-accessible pool of computing resources, versus I'm giving you this server and that's what you got.

Ben: You're talking about just internally. If all these teams are hitting each other's APIs internally, then yeah, there has to be some dynamic way that if a whole bunch more load starts coming in and you weren't told about it, you do have to be able to spin up the hardware to handle that.

David: It's brilliant of like, well, let's just make that an API, too. We can place an API call into IT. They have a pool of computing resources.

Ben: But much harder than it sounds.

David: Yes.

Ben: Oh, yeah. IT can just become an API.

David: No, this is a multi year journey for IT at Amazon, too. Of course, it wasn't like Bezos just sent the email that Steve Yegge described and everything happened overnight.

Ben: Yeah. Okay, so what you're telling me then is Bezos gets excited about this, Jassy starts working with him on it, they're basically translating this idea of the first little nugget that you planted is we should make sure that all of the APIs that we're making available internally, we should design them in mind as if they could be externally consumed at some point. But you haven't yet told me, how does some commercial offering eventually become available? And what is the commercial offering to third-party customers?

David: All right, we're now in mid-2003. This has been this huge transformative project within Amazon over the last 18 months. Jassy has been working a lot on it as Jeff's TA. Jeff's like, okay, Andy, it's time for you to go back out into the company. You're done being my TA. You have to go become a leader of something within the company.

It's almost like an echo of Jeff and David Shaw back at D.E. Shaw. They start thinking together like, okay, Andy, what are you going to do? What's the new thing? You're going to go lead within Amazon? Andy's probably happy he didn't leave Amazon, I think.

They come together to this idea of, well, maybe there's an opportunity to take the API-based IT infrastructure that we're developing here and offer it to third-parties. The legend goes, Andy puts together a six-pager.

Ben: This is the official Amazon legend. You can read about stuff about amazon.com

David: Yup. It's in official Amazon documents. Everything in Amazon happens in written narratives and six-pagers. He writes the six-pager. Famously, he has to tinker with the margins and adjust them to fit everything on the six pages.

He can't fit financial projections on there. There are no financial projections in this document. Then he whiteboards them out on the spot in the meeting with the S-Team and the board where he's proposing this big grand vision to take over Amazon Web Services, relaunch it with this new vision of being cloud IT infrastructure.

In the document, there is an ask a proposal to hire 57 new people to go pursue this initiative. Andy talks about he's so nervous going into the meeting. This is such a huge career moment. He's asking for 57 people. Nobody asks for 57 people. It's a ballsy move. He's risking everything. Jeff loves it, the board loves it, the S-Team loves it, and it gets approved.

I think all that actually happened or happened in some way, shape, or form. We mentioned Collin Brier who was running AWS until this point, Andy and Collin swapped places. Andy goes in, takes over AWS, and Collin becomes Jeff's next shadow.

Ben: Oh, I didn't realize that. Andy, right away, took over the publishing of images via the Amazon Associates API, that fledgling AWS?

David: Either that happened or this is part of the Amazon corporate history, hand-waving. All of it just went smoothly. Collin becomes Jeff's shadow. He then goes on to run IMDb when Amazon acquires IMDb. Then later, he would leave Amazon, teamed up with Bill Carr who ran Prime Video, and then they write Working Backwards.

I didn't realize this. This is brilliant. They now have a consulting firm together as part of Working Backwards to help companies implement the Amazon culture. It's freaking brilliant.

Back to Andy. He gets approval. He can hire 57 people. He recruits Adam Selipsky to come in and join the company. Adam, of course, would later leave AWS to become CEO of Tableau, and is now back at AWS where he is now CEO of AWS.

Ben: I watched every single re:Invent keynote to prepare for this, which I will tell you, that is a lot of IT conference keynote watching. The most recent one is Adam Selipsky. It's like 10–11 years of Jassy up there on stage and you finally get a different voice. It's a little bit jarring, especially when you're mainlining them all back to back when it's suddenly not Andy Jassy. Yeah, Adam is the guy now.

David: Do you know who else was in that first wave of external recruits who come in to join AWS?

Ben: I do not.

David: Jeff Lawson.

Ben: Oh, no way. The CEO of Twilio?

David: Yes.

Ben: Wow.

David: Which totally makes sense that Twilio would come out of AWS.

Ben: Yes, of course.

David: I think all of this really happens. Andy does write this doc, he does take over AWS, he absolutely builds and leads AWS from what it was, which was very different into what it is today. I think there's a little more to the story, too.

Ben: It's a convenient narrative. It's also a little bit odd that this idea could come from someone who wasn't in the muck.

David: It's actually a really good interview that Andy does with Harvard i-Lab in 2013. That's on YouTube. They're talking about the origin of AWS. I think the topic is intrapreneurship at companies, which is my God, the most disgusting word of all time.

Andy in the talk, he's like, well, we had to decide, as part of this vision document and the discussion around it, how do we launch this? Do we pick just one service, one IT primitive, and launch with that? Or do we put together a whole bunch of things and launch them all together? He says what they ended up doing was they got a tiger team together of the 10 best technical minds inside the company.

They deconstructed all the major web services, web applications of today, amazon.com itself, Google, eBay, he doesn't mention them by name, but I assume the other big web services of the time, big web applications, and then figured out what you would need to re architect those services based on this new cloud IT primitive infrastructure. They come up with a list. They decide you need storage, you need compute, you need databases, and you need a content distribution network, like what Akamai was to be able to recreate any internet service of scale.

Ben: I love that you say ‘was,’ like what Akamai was.

David: Story for another day, perhaps. They decided, you know what? We can’t fulfill our promise to developers if you can build web applications of scale with us, unless we launch with all of those services. We're going to build them all, and that's why we need 57 people.

Andy would later say a great quote and this is absolutely true. He says, "If you believe developers will build applications from scratch using web services as primitive building blocks, then the operating system becomes the Internet." That sounds true. That's what AWS is today. They're going to launch with everything they need to build a whole operating system. This is where the official narrative just completely falls apart, because that is totally not what happened, not even a little bit.

Ben: Nope. In fact, I can recall, personally, using Amazon S3 for something I was working on, and there was no EC2.

David: Yes. Unlike myth number one about AWS origins, you couldn't just take excess amazon.com IT capacity and externalize it. They had to go build all this from scratch as external services. It takes a couple of years to do that, for everything. In fairness, maybe in defense of the official narrative, they do start working on all of these suite of services all at once, and it just takes a while to get them all built. That probably is true, but yeah, S3 is the first service to launch by itself in March 2006.

Ben: Let's talk about it. It was an independently useful thing. S3 (Simple Storage Service), is a place that is available on the Internet. You don't have to think about where it is; it's in the cloud. You can dump images there if you're an application developer and then elsewhere from your application, or other applications, or no applications. If you just want to access the image directly by URL, you can access.

It's not just images, it's anything that you want to store up there. It's this wonderful, magical, amazing thing, where I don't have to buy a server, I don't have to configure a server, I don't have to rack a server, I don't have to think about maintaining a server, and I only pay as I go. It is insanely cheap.

David: Yeah. S3 launches in March 2006. EC2 launches a few months later, I think, in beta in August 2006.

Ben: What is EC2?

David: EC2 is Elastic Compute Cloud, which is the compute counterpart to the storage part of AWS and S3.

Ben: A simple way to think about EC2 is if you were a web application developer at the time, like I was, and you were writing stuff and you were running it on local hosts on your computer, and you had previously been deploying it to some server in a data center that you can Telnet to, ping, and see it had an IP address, you could basically spin up an EC2 instance and treat it like that, except it didn't have persistent storage associated with it. You can think about it like a computer without a hard drive that happens to live in the cloud and is yours until you stop using it.

David: It's your processor in the cloud, CloudFront, which is the content delivery network (the CDN), the Akamai part of the puzzle piece, launches in 2008. The first major database offering, RDS (relational database service), doesn't actually launch until 2009.

Ben: Importantly, RDS, it wasn't like you just start using RDS and now you don't have to use any of the stuff you've been using before. RDS would run the database that you were already using. I can't remember if it actually launched with Postgres, but assume you're normally self hosting Postgres on your server or you have a separate database server that you're used to running that runs Postgres. Now, you use RDS and it runs Postgres, and all your queries work, and you can treat it like it's your own database server.

David: That's the most obvious crack in the official narrative of the AWS origin, which brings us to the fourth origin story of AWS, the dissenting narrative, if you will.

Ben: At this point, the compass and story number one was 180 degrees off, and then in story number two, it got 90 degrees off. We're fine tuning now. Story three is basically right, but probably doesn't just include the full set of people that could have been written into the narrative.

David: I think story number four is basically right, too, but three and four are the same.

Ben: Success has many fathers.

David: Yes. Concurrently and separately, to everything we just said in story number three, Andy Jassy is working on Jeff's TA on this big problem, writing the vision doc, the business plan, and all that, hiring 57 people. In 2003, a network engineer at Amazon named Benjamin Black is working on the IT architecture transition that we talked about. He's working with Chris Pinkham, who is his boss, who, in fact, oversees all of network engineering within it at Amazon. Chris reports to Rick Dalzell, the CIO of Amazon.

The two of them—Benjamin and Chris—write a six-pager about how they actually are going to restructure the network engineering part of the IT architecture to the new model that the company is moving to. At the end of this document, supposedly, they mentioned that with the architecture that they have in mind, Amazon might actually be able to use that same architecture to sell virtual compute servers as a service to third-party developers. Indeed, Amazon could do that.

Ben: Now here's where things get murky, because that document definitely does exist. This idea that most of it is focused on, here's how we're going to execute our plan, and also, we could sell that Infrastructure as a Service. Here's where Ben Black, and his blog posts on the subject, and then future interviews he gives with Network World and others, are very insistent that they then showed this to Jeff Bezos. The proposal made its way to Jeff Bezos.

David: Yup, I think first to Rick and then to Jeff.

Ben: And he greenlit their project.

David: Yes, separately from the rest of AWS.

Ben: What I can't tell is, did this, before it got in front of Jeff, get merged into Andy's proposal and it was greenlit as one big thing, or where they're actually two different concurrent efforts?

David: We're going to tell the story, and then I have some thoughts on all this. Chris is actually from South Africa. Right around the same time, he and his family want to move back to South Africa, leave Seattle and move back to Cape Town in South Africa.

He goes to Rick, his boss, and says, hey, I'm actually going to leave and move back, move failing back. Rick is like. Oh, no, we're in the middle of this huge architecture transition. This is a key moment in the company. You are a super valuable person at the company.

What if we do the same thing we're doing in Palo Alto with A9 and Lab126? We'll set up a new Amazon subsidiary in Cape Town, South Africa that you can lead. We can retain your talents, and we can figure out what that new subsidiary will do. Chris is like, oh, okay, that sounds good.

Chris and Rick start thinking about this and they decide, well, we just had this idea, Benjamin and I, in that paper that we wrote about selling virtualized servers to third parties. What if we work on that at the new subsidiary? So they do. Benjamin doesn't come along, but Chris and a really, really great engineer named Chris Brown.

Ben: From what I can tell, this is where Ben Black's involvement ends, where he was part of pitching the idea, but it's not actually a part of building the thing that they're going to build in South Africa.

David: Yup. Chris and Chris go off to South Africa. They start working independently on this compute server idea, and they do. That becomes EC2. It's that team in South Africa that builds EC2.

Brad Stone writes in The Everything Store, "EC2 was born in isolation with Pinkham talking to his colleagues in Seattle only sporadically, at least for the first year. Pinkham later said that the solitude was beneficial as it offered a comfortable distance from Amazon's intrusive CEO." Quote from Pinkham: "I spent most of my time trying to hide from Bezos," Pinkham says. "He was a fun guy to talk to, but you did not want to be his pet project. He would love it to distraction." Hilarious.

Ben: You can start to see even in these very public, reasonably nice quotes that there's enough tension between Chris Pinkham and Bezos-Jassy leadership that even in the official Amazon, things that they put out about the development in South Africa, Chris Pinkham's name is nowhere to be found, even in the South Africa–specific blog post about the history of EC2. There's clearly chafing between Chris and the leadership.

David: Yup, and Andy Jassy's infamous one-star review of The Everything Store on amazon.com. In one of the several passages where he talks about how Brad had it all wrong, here's a quote from Andy: "The vision document proposing the AWS business and outlining the initial set of services for AWS including our compute service (EC2) was finished and presented to the executive team in September 2003. I wrote the document and was lucky to have the help of several people in putting it together." This was about a year before Chris Pinkham moved to South Africa to build the initial version of EC2.

Chris played an integral role in the definition, team building, and product building of EC2 despite leaving before EC2 was launched. Clearly, there's some bad blood here, but my thoughts. I want your thoughts, too. I just find this whole thing ridiculous, because of course, it doesn't matter.

The most ridiculous thing is that what I think actually happened here, which is there were multiple teams working on multiple related things within the company, that's how Amazon prides itself on running, decentralized innovation. That was the whole point of this whole freaking exercise. Decentralize, let teams innovate, what’s Jeff say? Invent and Wander is the mantra of him and the company.

I think that's what actually happened. The official version now of AWS history of it was all centrally planned, it was all in that 2003 document, that just seems silly to me and counterproductive.

Ben: I agree. The other thing that becomes clear is, it's really not about the idea. It's about the execution. I know this is a trope. To make it a little bit more specific, it can be about the idea if you define the idea as the hundreds of micro ideas that comprise the main idea. But if you're saying that the idea is something articulated in a sentence, that's pretty much worthless.

Maybe even in a vision doc, it's about the thousands of micro decisions you make while executing it and actually doing the work to execute it that ends up mattering. History is written by the victors, so we're seeing some of that play out here. The other thing that's very clear, as Andy Jassy is just a brilliant strategist and fantastic leader.

Of course, someone like him in the organization would end up actually running it. I don't even know why there's dispute over, well, it was my idea. It's like, well, who cares? Who's going to end up turning this thing into a world-changing business?

David: You had that great playbook theme and takeaway from the amazon.com episode that I think you posted as a clip on Twitter and LinkedIn that went so viral. People who were originally Amazon employees loved it, which was your idea that Amazon was a pathfinding algorithm.

Ben: Yeah, it was brute forcing its way through a maze to eventually find the correct way by just gathering data. Launch stuff, gather data, tear it down, and start again.

David: Yup. Go through the maze, hit a dead end, backtrack a step or two, go take another path. I think that actually is also how AWS launched.

Ben: Early on, but I want to get to that in my playbook, because I think it actually contrast that in some ways.

David: Okay, fun.

Ben: All right, it launches. The last thing to highlight here is the importance of the primitives. I don't know how intentional it was in the moment, but it became something that later on would become hugely important to them, which is that they truly were unopinionated about this as a platform.

They said, we're going to launch with primitives. It's the most basic story that's the most basic compute, it's the most basic way to host your databases, it's the most basic CDN, and we can't wait to see what developers build in an innovative way with our absolute bare bones architecture, that would go on to be called Infrastructure as a Service as a category.

Again, I do not know if it was an intentional thing or not when they were first launching it. But they did not say, let's try and build a new OS, a new programming paradigm. No, we're just going to give you super basic building blocks, and you run with it.

David: All that's on the technical side we've been spending a lot of time there. We've alluded to this, but let's talk about what a radical innovation this was on the business and market side. I've got a great quote here. " When S3 launched," probably at the same time that you were playing around with it, "a truly world class, fantastic engineer at Microsoft at the time by the name of James Hamilton,” who's now an S-Team member and SVP Distinguished Engineer at Amazon, “because of what he saw with AWS, he wrote on his personal blog about trying out S3 when it launched with a personal project"

Here's a quote from him. "What was even more disruptive was a credit card was all that was needed to provision storage. There was no required proposal for financial approval. There was no RFP, no vendor selection process, no vendor negotiation, and no datacenter space needed to be found. I could just sign up and start working from deciding to write the app to it being up and running on the Internet was measured in days.

After debugging and testing extensively, the end of the month rolled around and I got my visa bill. Of course, I knew abstractly, that S3 was disruptively priced. But when I saw that my bill for the entire development and test of this application was $3.08, it just seemed wrong. Once development was complete, I was still storing all the test data in S3. The following month, I got a bill for $0.07."

Ben: No joke, David. Every month, I get a bill from AWS for 71 cents, and I have no idea what old project it was for. It's one of these things where it's priced so dynamically. If it was a big successful project holding a lot of data, then it would be expensive.

They actually have pretty good margins on S3, on bandwidth, and some of these things. But because it was an abandoned project for which I do not know what the email address to login to AWS is from whatever team I was working on, I just don't care.

David: Could you imagine back in 2006, let alone even probably today, Oracle, Microsoft, IBM, HP, or you name it?

Ben: They all have six-, seven-, and eight-figure contracts. There's no way that they're going to invest in, hey, let's let people pay with a credit card and service this tiny little market.

David: And we'll charge you $3.08. This was unbelievably world-changing, truly world-changing. This is how Dropbox, Instagram, Airbnb, Uber, Zynga, all of these companies, get started.

Ben: I remember being at all the Startup Weekends and all these hackathons, where the audience, the family members who came, the venture capitalists who came to be the judges, it was blowing the audience's mind how fast people could stand something up in 48 hours. Because suddenly, you didn't have to spend $5 million in three months figuring out what data center you were going to put something in. You actually could just have an idea and get it out there within two days. This birth that movement.

David: We all lived it. Rover.com, where in all and various ways, part of next to our great friend and mentor, Greg Gottesman. He was a VC. He wasn't technical. It got built in a weekend.

Ben: Yeah, Phil Kimmey.

David: Phil, our buddy, built it. Amazon, of course, embraces this. In fall of 2007, they start the AWS Startup Challenge. They host it first in September 2007. They didn't win, but do you know who was part, a contestant in that very first AWS Startup Challenge?

Ben: Is it Teach Street? Is it going to be some Amazon inside baseball?

David: Oh, even better. Justin.tv.

Ben: No way.

David: Which, of course, would pivot into Twitch.

Ben: Which, Amazon would then buy.

David: Of course, Amazon would then buy.

Ben: Wow, for the better part of a billion dollars, right?

David: Yup. I don't have a good sense of how Twitch is doing now. I assume Amazon got a good deal on that almost no matter what. We got to find the right way to revisit that.

Ben: For sure, but that is a great use case. Justin.tv early, they were using a lot of bandwidth to stream video. They were using a lot of S3 to store. It was a great use case. Man, did Amazon embrace this thing. This is probably one of the biggest keys to success or playbook themes for why AWS became successful.

They realized how perfect this was for startups, they realized how hard it would be for large enterprises to just wholesale move over. They realized that was not going to be the first beachhead market. But for startups who were building something from scratch, who could go on to become $50+ billion companies, my God, let's get them on AWS.

The blitz was so impressive. I remember the first time I met Dave Chappelle who was doing developer evangelism for AWS early with Jeff Barr and so many other folks there. It was just a breath of fresh air, where every happy hour you went to, there were AWS people who were giving you tons of free credits, who were helping introduce you to other people for your startup.

They all thought about themselves as active participants in the startup community. It just became this obvious default that you would build on AWS, because it felt so ingrained with how you make startups. You start an AWS account for the thing that you're going to build.

There's a famous Andy Jassy refrain that you hear at basically every re:Invent where he talks about first, there were the enterprise cloud doubters who said, oh, maybe this is good for startups, but it's no good for line of business applications. It's no good for mission-critical applications. And, oh, maybe it'll be good for my test environment or my dev environment, but I won't be able to run enterprise-grade stuff there.

David: I think his line is, at first, it was that nobody thought you could run a real application. It was only what James was building, like a personal test project. Then it was like, oh, well, startups can run in AWS, but real enterprises won't do that. Then it was like, well, as a real enterprise, we can run non-differentiated, non-mission critical stuff in AWS, but we're not going to put our mission critical stuff in AWS. That's going to be on-prem. Then it was like, oh, my God, take my money.

Ben: Right. I think there's this interesting, obvious first beachhead of customers that are at startups. When you think about the enterprise adoption, and how eventually, now, your bank's application is on AWS, and everything was moving to the cloud or $120 billion a year of revenue has already moved to the cloud of, at least, Microsoft, Amazon, or Google. There are these three prepositions of the cloud.

There are people building on the cloud, which, to me, that's lift and shift. That's really like a phrase that the cloud industry uses for, hey, you are running some local databases, you had some local storage, you basically had your data center, and you just want to lift that up, shift it over, and drop it in Amazon's datacenter. You're not going to take advantage of any cool stuff, you're just going to now run your stuff in Amazon.

The benefit that you get out of that is, you only pay for what you use. You don't have to pay the big upfront costs. And you don't have to maintain it yourself. But otherwise, exactly the same thing.

David: Jassy, actually, at the first re:Invent in 2012, as part of his presentation, he has a great slide on this where he talks about the six reasons AWS wins versus traditional infrastructure for enterprises. It's exactly what he said. (1) You're trading ae in CapEx for OpEx, which you can take all that expense in every income statement every year as opposed to capitalizing it. (2) You're getting lower OpEx than you could on your own. Thanks to AWS's economies of scale.

Ben: They're getting better deals on their servers, so they're passing those along to you.

David: Yup. (3) You don't have to guess on infrastructure capacity ahead of time. AWS is elastic. As you need more, it scales up. As you need less, it scales down.

And that’s actually, (4) It can scale down. When projects don't work, you're not stuck with legacy leftover infrastructure from things that don't work.

(5) Engineers can focus on writing code, not installing infrastructure. Focus on what makes your beer taste better.

And then, (6) You're instantly global on AWS, versus when you run your own on-prem datacenters, you're like, wherever your data centers are.

Ben: Which sounds nice. It's not quite true. It's not one global availability zone. Actually, interesting point, that was the original premise. They thought they were going to abstract that away, and you were going to imagine a global S3 data center.

When you deployed it, it just went to all of the datacenters, and then they quickly realized, we're going to have so much traffic from so many customers that we're going to consume WAN. We're going to consume the Internet's bandwidth replicating unnecessarily. There is, you do not run globally by default in every single. Anyway, yes.

There's this step two, which is building in the cloud. That's taking advantage of using things like the relational database service, that RDS, the very early thing that they launched, which is, hey, this isn't just your exact same code and your exact same infrastructure, but in our data center and build differently, you're actually taking advantage of a cloud-native service. Then there's building for the cloud, and that's the future. Those are things like Lambda and DynamoDB.

If you think about Lamda, for folks who have not done this or heard of the serverless movement, it's this idea that you don't even need to reserve an EC2 instance or deploy code to it. You just write your code and then when you want to call it, a thing just spins up for a few milliseconds, runs your code, and spins down. You were never aware of its IP address or where in the world it was. You just know that your code executed.

That's really like building for the cloud. You're completely architecting your application differently to take advantage of this very different world of computing the cloud offers.

David: If we rewind the origin stories number two and three of the big monolith software problem, all the engineers and product teams in Amazon, and every other internet company were spending all their time focused on not making the beer tastes better, undifferentiated, heavy IT lifting, in the beginning, really what happened is probably development teams in those days were spending like 70% of their time on infrastructure and setup and 30% of their time on software development.

And then AWS shifted it to, okay, spend 70% of your time on software development and 30% of your time on worrying about our APIs and your infrastructure. This for the cloud, Lambda, everything is like, that's taking it down to zero.

Ben: That's the goal, at least. I think all this stuff sounds better in principle than it actually ends up in practice. But yeah, that's the idea.

AWS, in its earliest days, let's call it the first couple of years, it was really startup focused. New applications from whole cloth that want to use our Infrastructure as a Service, primitive building blocks.

They very quickly realized, if we're doing Infrastructure as a Service, it also does enable this lift and shift thing. As long as we work like hell to satisfy the compliance, requirements, availability requirements, uptime, and all this stuff, replication requirements of enterprises...

David: And SOC 2 audited with Vanta.

David: There you go. Perfect. Very quickly, AWS could serve these two markets of startups and the lift and shift enterprise. Another way you could have designed this is instead of doing this Infrastructure as a Service and these primitives, you could say, let's think about the far future, the Lambdas of the world. We're imagining now in 2006, why don't we just build that stuff to start? Let's change the development paradigm. Let's build the platform of the future, that platform will live in the cloud. That platform is not Windows of the past or the App Store of the current day, where it was just coming. That platform of the cloud, why don't we start writing the brand new paradigm today?

There are a couple other big tech companies that took that approach, at first, that were completely wrong. The unfortunate thing for Microsoft and for Google, who really started at this Platform as a Service layer was, you basically didn't get the startups because you didn't have a mature platform yet that people were excited to build on and understood how to build for. But you also didn't get the enterprises because there was no ability to lift and shift. If you were creating a Platform as a Service in the late 2000s, you're really a decade early, and you're building for a market that doesn't yet exist.

David: Okay, let's talk about what happens, because Amazon ran the table on maybe the most important market of all time.

Ben: For the first five years with nobody competing with them.

David: It's incredible. 2006 is when the first services launched. 2007–2008, that's when the startups are getting started—Airbnb, Uber, Instagram and the like. They're becoming big, but they're not yet at the scale that they are today. 2009, Netflix becomes a customer.

Ben: How crazy is this? They had already built their own, in the last three years, basically cloud internally in order to stream video, which was originally, I think, stream through Silverlight. They had this big partnership with Microsoft.

David: That's right. Oh, my God. That was so terrible.

Ben: Yes. I think you had to use IE to view it. It was bad. They had just invested a bunch and then did an about face and said, oh, we were wrong. Actually, we're going to use AWS instead.

David: We're moving all of it to AWS. I believe Netflix is still to this day, I think, 100% on AWS.

Ben: I don't know about 100%, but yes, they're still an enormous customer. Reed Hastings was actually the very first guest interviewed on stage at the first re:Invent in 2012.

David: I think in that interview, if it wasn't that one, it's another one around that time, he talks about people say, Reed, you compete with amazon.com, aren't you worried about being on AWS? And he's like, no. I'm not worried at all about being on AWS. It is legitimately the smart infrastructure decision for us to make.

Ben: That was such a feather in Amazon's cap. They've had two big feathers in their cap, there's that one and the CIA one. It's secure enough for the CIA to use, so it should be secure enough for you, and that was a few years later.

The Netflix one, a lot of people were afraid to use AWS early on because they felt like they didn't want to do business with Amazon if they were a retailer, or they didn't want to do business with Amazon if they were in video, or in any of these things that Amazon was competing on. Reed getting up on stage and saying this matter of factly and so forcefully was him saying, you can trust that AWS is different than Amazon.

David: Okay. Why is Reed and Netflix making this decision? Why then do a bunch of other customers do this? Microsoft, let's put Google to the side for a minute, but IBM, Oracle, all these legacy technology companies, why are they asleep at the wheel here? It's the disruptive pricing model.

Ben: Let's not loop them together, because I actually think it's worth analyzing each company failed to claim this opportunity for unique reasons.

The first couple, it's worth analyzing. I think what you're pointing out as these old server companies. The IBMs and Oracle on the database side, that made these ridiculous gross margins, and they sold you this complete proprietary solution.

David: Yeah, 80% gross margins.

Ben: Totally. They would sell that to you. They would install it in your data center. Eventually, they would hand wave and call something cloud.

David: Private cloud, private cloud.

Ben: They might do it in their datacenter or they might do it in yours, but it's effectively the same thing. It's sold on a license basis that comes with auditing. Amazon has this ability to literally meter your usage and then charge you exactly what you need to be charged. Whereas this old model of buying a bunch of Oracle licenses and deploying them on the servers in your datacenter, you just get these audits every once in a while.

Okay, cool. We sold you a license and you bought this many licenses, we'll show up and make sure that you aren't misusing this thing. They weren't going to change that business model. It was a license to print money.

David: Amazon targeted gross margins and operating margins for AWS in the 20%–40% range.

Ben: Which felt like a 10X and a 20X for them, but was unattractive to the traditional.

David: Right. This is the perspective. Amazon.com is operating on a 2% operating margin basis. For Amazon, they're like, oh shoot, we get 10X–20X. Our margin basis with this new business, awesome, but that's still less than half of the margin that the old school guys are getting.

Ben: The old school guys are certainly fat and happy on their operations. Whereas Amazon knows how to run everything they've ever run as this unbelievable lean machine, because they're so COGS-sensitive on everything.

David: Here's another thing, though. You mentioned, call it the Oracle's or the IBM's whoever, they'd come install this software on computers for you or in their data centers, call it private cloud or whatever. They'd install Oracle database version 19. Two years later, you're paying your maintenance costs, you're going to pay an upgrade cost to go to Oracle database version 20, and then you're going to go a couple of years later to version 21, and you're going to pay a bunch of money every time you migrate.

Ben: Right. Why would you give up this annuity that you have?

David: Right. Cloud infrastructure, it's always up to date. There is no version. Whatever you're using, you're using the latest stuff, because it's always. Then even more than that, Amazon gets to constantly iterate versus doing these Windows XP every four years, we're going to ship a big update. No, it's just constantly changing.

Ben: Yup. Okay, that's super old guard, the IBM's and Oracle's, which is very funny. When you watch all these keynotes, I wonder if anyone's ever watched them all mainline like I did, because I have this unique perspective seeing them also close to each other.

They used to, onstage, refer to IBM and Oracle in a tongue in cheek way. They would refer to like a New York company and it would be like IBM logo, but it would say like New York company. Oracle, they would go as far as to like a San Francisco company, and then they might make a reference to a super yacht, sailing, or something to really drive the point home.

Around 2016–2017, they totally did an about face, and they just start directly attacking them. They start directly attacking Microsoft, too, because I think Microsoft went from, in the early days, someone where Amazon looked at them more as a partner, like, we're happy to run Microsoft stuff on your AWS instances. Now that Azure has actually been an extremely viable competitor and made a big, big comeback...

David: They're the best competitor to AWS by far.

Ben: Amazon now loves attacking SQL server licenses and stuff like that that Microsoft, of course, comes in and audits just like the old guard for. Let's look at Microsoft, though. Let's think back to the mid-2000s, because this really should have been their business to take. They should have figured this out.

There are essentially two problems going on at Microsoft. One, the Windows group just had too much power. Between them, the Windows Server people, and the SQL Server people, the goal of those groups was to get customers to do more with this idea that people thought was going to be big for a while.

PCs taking over the datacenter, then PC Operating Systems becoming the data center operating system. Really, the goal was sell more Windows Server licenses, and that was a great business. Anything that looked too much like that within Microsoft got gobbled up in an internal power struggle, because it could look like it would cannibalize that thing.

David: This was probably happening when you were there, right?

Ben: Yes. It was sort of over by the time I was there in 2012 is when I arrived. They did eventually realize that they had to make a big bet on Azure and totally separate from Windows Server. We should give Ballmer credit because he did see this.

They replaced the leader of that organization at the time of Windows Server and tools business with Satya, who would eventually, of course, become CEO, and then really doubled down on the cloud strategy. They realized, okay, Azure needs to be a thing that's kept separate, has CEO sponsorship, and can escape the Windows Server thing.

Their second problem is what we were talking about earlier. They launched this thing called Azure Cloud Services, which they've now basically deprecated, which was a Platform as a Service approach. Microsoft had the golden goose. They had all the IT relationships.

What they should have done is gone to everyone that was using Windows Server and say, great news, we have primitives in a datacenter that you can lift and shift to much like how Azure works today. You can trust us, you already pay us. We'll make this a part of your enterprise agreement, but Microsoft got clever. They thought, you know what? Win32 runtime, the .NET platform, we’re a great platform company.

Developers want to build for the things that we make, so let's make the next generation set of APIs and platforms for building great cloud applications. They just totally did not recognize the magical thing they had in front of them, which was all the customers and all the distribution, who over the next five years, would slowly dribble out and start their new stuff on AWS while Microsoft was still figuring out its strategy.

They got caught in that middle of people building brand new apps, didn't know how to build for their platforms, and they didn't want the lock in. That's still a big thing in cloud, oh, don't get locked in, you want to be multi cloud. They didn't make it easy for their existing customers to lift and shift.

Microsoft, while they're in a great place now and have figured out an interesting strategy, and we can talk about the Baron bowl later, they just had five years of watching pitches go by.

David: Yeah. Oh, it was such a whiff. Okay, we talked about Oracle. I want to come back to Oracle in a minute. We talked about Microsoft. What about Google?

Ben: Google is the third place. Amazon's got 35%, maybe 40%. Microsoft's got 20%–22%. Google is somewhere around 10%.

David: Microsoft having 22%, that's an enormous win.

Ben: Totally. Here's my take on Google. They accidentally became a business. They launched as a project, and then they figured out this business that became unbelievably cash-generative, immediately.

The nature of their business being search and feeding all the data directly and to make the results better, is that they instantly became a consumer-sponsored monopoly. Totally legally done competitions, just a click away, but they're the best experience. They just have these unbelievable reinforcing effects of becoming a monopoly.

They're a super high gross margin monopoly in the biggest market in the world, which is people wanting to use the Internet, and they're the front door to the Internet. Their entire existence, it's not that it's been easy, because it's been a computer science challenge.

David: It's been very academic.

Ben: They've never had to go into a hard business. I don't know what Google's advertising margins are, but that business probably runs at, I guess it depends if you put sales above the line or below the line, but 80% gross margins. A 30% gross margin business is not particularly attractive to them, nor are they good at sales. I know they're getting better.

The narrative at the time was they made this G Suite thing, which at the time was called Google Apps, but no one would buy it. They ended up giving basically all of it away for free to consumers forever. Google Docs, Gmail, and everything. It was the best thing to use, and they couldn't figure out any way to sell it to enterprises.

They didn't have the competency of enterprise sales the way that Microsoft did. They didn't have the ability like Amazon to operate in these really hard businesses, eeking out every last dollar. It just looked unattractive. Meanwhile, they actually had the best technology for it.

They actually operated these big datacenters and this really novel way of networking all the computers together in order to pull off search. They were inventing machine learning before machine learning. A huge value prop of the cloud now is all your data is in the cloud.

That way, you can use a bunch of stuff that Google invented, TensorFlow, Kubernetes, to run your stuff in the cloud. This also was theirs to win, but they didn't have the sales and marketing muscle. I don't think they have the iron gut that Amazon had to go do something grinded out and hard.

David: I think they also made the mistake that you're originally talking about. I thought you were talking about Google, and then you said it was Microsoft, too, of building too far in the future. I think Google made that mistake, too.

Ben: Yup, that's totally true. The first foray was Google App Engine, which was in no way Infrastructure as a Service. It was not primitives. I think you can write in Python, or Java. It was a specific API surface for GAE, and you can make app engine apps. It was all abstracted away from you.

It's kind of the same Microsoft thing if we're going to get really clever and build you a platform of the future. But Google, per the Steve Yegge rant, is not at all a platform company. They didn't really know how to build it. They didn't know how to sell it. They didn't know how to identify a market for it. They didn't know how to support developers in it at the time, so that fell on its face. What is GCP? Google Cloud Platform is now a very viable player in this race, but that's not where they started.

David: Yup. I want to rewind back to Oracle and talk about something. One thing that really came up in the research, from talking to people, and friends at AWS and Amazon, Amazon and AWS deserves so much credit for overcoming one of the hurdles that you just said Google had, which was Google didn't know how to do sales. Amazon didn't know how to do enterprise sales either.

Ben: That's a great point.

David: When AWS started, like we talked about, the obvious core product market fit and first set of customers was startups. They don't want enterprise sales. They just want to pay with a credit card online. Amazon didn't have to figure it out. But they then did also figure it out and served enterprises, governments, government agencies, big institutions, did the lift and shift thing, and then brought those big enterprises along.

Ben: I think it started with academia. Their first big contracts were with universities doing research and running effectively like their supercomputer loads on AWS.

David: NASA was famously a customer starting in 2009.

Ben: That's right. They did the data streaming and then the video distribution of the Mars landing, right?

David: That's right.

Ben: That was the first big thing. But working with NASA and the academic community on how do we fit in with institutions, I think, taught them some of that enterprise muscle.

David: Those folks don't want to pay with a credit card.

Ben: Right.

David: You got to do contracts, you got to do billing, you got to do discounts, you need a salesforce, and you need all this stuff. You need to do a big conference like re:Invent.

Ben: They had to have poached a bunch of Oracle salespeople, because the Amazon sales machine is a lot like the Oracle sales machine of old.

David: Yup. Okay, let's talk about Oracle. One of the things that I think to most people—was to me before doing the research here—is vastly under-appreciated about AWS is people think about EC2, S3, Infrastructure as a Service, compute, storage, networking, and all that. True. Amazon doesn't record this. But if you Google estimates of what the most popular AWS services are, the most used ones, EC2, S3, they're juggernauts.

Numbers three, four, and five are all databases. AWS is a huge database business. They have taken so much share from Oracle. While it's all related, it's infrastructure. It's also a different kind of business from infrastructure. Famously, AWS Redshift. Why is it called Redshift?

Ben: Yes. For people who don't know this, there's an official Amazon talk track and then there is a real talk track. The official Amazon talk track, do you know this one, David?

David: That it's a Doppler effect or something like that?

Ben: Yeah, it's physics related. I think Amazon actually used Doppler as a codename for Alexa. Of course, one of their buildings in Seattle is that. When the sound waves get bunched up or spread out, when a siren goes by, it's the Doppler effect. Redshift is the light equivalent. It's like a star moving away from you.

David: But there's another part of the story here.

Ben: Shift away from Big Red.

David: Yeah, which is Oracle. The database market is freaking huge. There are two properties of the database market that people just don't think about, but are incredible. One, the global market size for database software is $100 billion. It is growing at 10% per year, because everything you do with computing, you need to store it in a database. You need databases, and you can't get away from them. It's big and it's growing fast. Two, database software may be the stickiest software of all time.

Ben: Especially at the scale that people are producing data now. It's actually worth contextualizing this a little bit. There are all these stats all the time, which are something like last year, more data was produced and stored than in the entire decade before and in the entire century before that. That's not the exact stat, but there are 11 different variants of it, which we all intuitively know because we're storing data on our phones. But when you have two things exponentially growing, it's hard to intuit the difference between those two things.

We know this about data. We also know this about the Internet. When you talked about dial up back in the day, then when people got their first cable or T1 Line, and meanwhile, I'm here, podcasting, and David, I'm seeing you and gigabit down directly into my computer, it's unbelievable. You think, wow, these two things have the same phenomena, except that they're actually moving at very different rates.

The Internet has not gotten faster at the rate that data storage has increased. This is most illustrated in some of the AWS re:Invent talks. They're like, hey, a lot of you want to shift to the cloud, but you have a petabyte of data or some of you have an exabyte of data in your data center. What do we do about that?

They first released this thing that was a 100-terabyte super secure thing they would ship to your office called the Snowball. You plug it in, it would automatically get all your data and had a Kindle on it, so it would actually display a custom shipping thing. You could track it all the way back, it would arrive in the Amazon datacenter, and they would audit. It was like tamper proof, bullet proof. It's an amazing thing.

They've released a few other generations of them now. There are even some with compute on them for field applications. And then the curves kept going. The Internet kept getting a little bit faster, but our data storage kept getting a lot more significant.

There are some stat that Andy gives on stage in a keynote in 2016–2017, somewhere in there, where they announced Amazon Snowmobile. Because all of us are sitting here on computers that have a terabyte, 2 terabytes, or 4-terabyte hard drive, you're like, 100 terabytes is not that meaningful. They're like, we will send a Snowmobile to your data center, which is a semi truck full of Snowballs, effectively, so that you can get the data to us.

Even with this solution, never underestimate the bandwidth of a semi truck moving down the highway. This type of solution, it can still take six months to migrate all of your data into the cloud. Whereas it would have taken you years, and years, and years, and years, I don't know the better part of a century, to actually upload it over the wide area network, over the Internet.

That, I think, illustrates pretty heavily your point about once you decide to put all of your enterprise data into a database hosted in some specific vendor's cloud, there's pretty meaningful lock in there. There are very practical concerns with moving.

David: I can do you one better. Another example. Amazon.com used Oracle databases when it was started. Amazon.com did not finish their migration off of Oracle databases and onto AWS products until 2019.

Ben: Oh, my God.

David: Thirteen years after AWS launched.

Ben: That is insane.

David: It took that long for Amazon itself to migrate off of Oracle.

Ben: Meanwhile, by that point, Amazon had eight different database solutions for other companies to use and had invented three of them. There are open-source ones they host for you, but they also created DynamoDB. They invented new database technologies that are compatible with other relational databases, but way faster, way more performant, and it's still hard to migrate within the company.

David: Amazing. You just play that forward and you're like, wow, okay, (a) there's still so much revenue that's going to shift to AWS, and (b) It's going to be so sticky. One of the most amazing stats that (again) one of our friends pointed out to us—I tweeted about this and I posted it on LinkedIn; it's just crazy—AWS today is on an $80 billion revenue run rate. That is not the most crazy, impressive, defensible thing about AWS. If you go look in the financials in the latest 10Q from Amazon, they have to report the AWS revenue backlog.

Ben: Basically, a revenue that's contracted but not recognized yet.

David: These are contracts mostly with big enterprises of revenue they've signed deals for, but that is not yet recognized. It's going to be recognized in future quarters. That backlog of committed contractual signed revenue is over $100 billion. I don't even know what to say about that.

Ben: There are a lot more storage and compute not on the cloud than currently in the cloud.

David: Amazon could shut down all sales efforts, stop growing, literally turn off the lights in terms of new business today, and they still have $100 billion more business that is contractually coming their way.

Ben: It's insane.

David: Crazy. It's crazy.

Ben: David, you mentioned, they're on a $70, $80 billion run rate right now?

David: $80 billion.

Ben: In 2014, Jeff Bezos wrote the annual memo that comes out, a letter to shareholders and said, "I believe that AWS’s market size is unconstrained." That was the point at which it was a year before they broke out AWS's financials, and I think it was a $6 billion run rate business.

David: When the "AWS IPO," which I think Ben Thompson coined that term. It happened in 2015. That was when they reported Q1 2015 earnings. That point in time, AWS had a $6 billion revenue run rate.

Ben: It was probably like a $4 billion business. When Bezos is like, wow, this thing, I think it's unconstrained, it's nuts. The real story here is Amazon discovered a new unregulated public utility that they could generate enormous margins on.

David: Enormous for Amazon margins.

Ben: Okay, but enormous raw dollar margins, absolute dollar margins. This is a business that they can generate billions and billions of dollars in profits by operating and is effectively a public utility. The market sizes, I think I said 120 billion earlier, but I think that's being conservative and growing at 30% per year with no end in sight of this thing, continuing to compound at that rate.

David: I always used to think about and talk about the mega trend of our lifetimes is the Internet believing the Internet. That's the bedrock of modern life. AWS is what powers the Internet, that's true. What I've realized here, it's more than the Internet. It is anything that a computer could touch. AWS takes a tax on that, essentially.

Now to bring it full circle, anything a computer could touch is the Internet. It's one in the same these days. Jeff, it's a crazy statement, but I think he's right. Its market size is unconstrained.

Ben: It certainly was in 2014. I wonder if you could even make it now.

David: Yeah. Okay. The AWS IPO happens in 2015. "IPO," $6 billion revenue run rate for AWS, 70% annual growth rate.

Ben: That's right. It was still growing like crazy then. I think now it's growing like 30%–35%. But then, it was nuts.

David: 30%–35% growth on $80 billion is nuts. Yeah, 19.2% operating margin. When that happens, Amazon stock jumps 15%. When that earnings release comes out, it should have jumped like 500% and does over the next year or two.

Ben: What an idiot I was for not buying the day that it jumped that percent. Isn't that the funniest thing about all this? You look at it and you're like, well, now the stock's expensive. No, the stock was still very cheap.

David: Very cheap, very cheap. In 2016, this is interesting, Andy Jassy was not technically the CEO of Amazon Web Services.

Ben: Senior Vice President of AWS.

David: Yup, until 2016. In 2016, they restructured corporately. Jeff Bezos becomes CEO of the whole company, Jassy becomes CEO of AWS, and Jeff Wilke becomes CEO of everything else, Amazon retail.

That year, AWS does $12 billion in revenue, over 50% of the company's operating profits, which as we said, they do every year. $17 billion in revenue the next year, then $25 billion, $45 billion in 2020. $62 billion last year but $80 billion run rate. Today, it's sitting on a $100 billion backlog that's coming rain or shine. It's just freaking unbelievable.

July 5th, 2021, Jeff Bezos retires.

Ben: Isn't it crazy, that was only a year ago? It feels longer.

David: I know. Yeah, crazy. They announced it before them, but that's when it actually happened. Andy Jassy become CEO of all of Amazon. Adam Selipsky becomes CEO of Amazon Web Services. I think this was part of the most recent earnings release this most recent quarter. They did a Snowmobile operation on the International Space Station.

Ben: Oh, I didn't know that. Really?

David: Yeah. I don't know if they worked with SpaceX or maybe Blue Origin. They sent some Snowballs up to the space station, and they lifted and shifted out of the space station. We've said it before, but AWS has about a 39% market share of the cloud, Azure, 21%, Alibaba, 10%.

They're the dominant player in China, which is an interesting story in and of itself. Similar to Amazon, it was Alibaba that became the dominant cloud player in China. It'd be fun to dig into how that happened. Google is about 7%.

Ben: Yup. It's pretty interesting to look at all the ways they're pressing their advantages too. In 2015, that year, they broke out finances. They also bought Annapurna labs. This is an Israeli company. They started custom designing chips, which we've seen in both their training chips.

They've done custom. I think they're called Trainium, and then they have inference chips, which are also some crazy name, Inferentia. They have custom machine learning chips.

David: Do you know who makes these chips?

Ben: TSMC?

David: Of course, a big TSMC customer.

Ben: The other thing is that, in many ways, it's the embrace-extended strategy that Microsoft ran. First, they have RDS and they're like, you could run anything in RDS. Then they start doing things like launching Amazon Aurora, which is a direct attack at Oracle and a proprietary database software that they own and control. They're like, but it's so fast and it's so performant. It's compatible. Oh, and by the way, we generate much better margins on it.

It's all these things that they used to attack Oracle for. They're like, look, now that we have all the customers, why don't we do some proprietary databases, too? We can generate more margins on those. There are ways that they generate huge margins like bandwidth. AWS makes 90+% gross margins on their bandwidth charges.

There are many ways where, yes, cloud is still objectively better than the old way that the licenses were structured, the old way of storing on-prem, the old way of hiring all your own IT people, but also Amazon is starting to feel themselves on the lead that they've generated and run some of the same playbook.

The other thing, so then the question becomes like, why machine learning? Because it's so clear that compute is this massive pillar of the business. Databases has been stood up as not quite as important, but definitely more important from a stickiness perspective. Every year, they announced some new database thing when they're on stage.

Machine learning, they've announced SageMaker. They've broken out the keynote, so now there's a custom ML keynote. They have a whole bunch of cloud-hosted ML offerings. They run TensorFlow, which is funny because that's the thing that Google created. They have their own container service.

They also have their own elastic Kubernetes service. They have to serve customers, because customers want Kubernetes, but they're trying to get you to use their own custom ACS (Amazon Container Service). What's becoming clear to me is the machine learning capabilities that Amazon has need to be good, but they actually don't need to be as good as Google's, because here's the strategy with machine learning.

You're going to use whatever ML is available with where your data is, because running machine learning near your data is the most important thing. Once you've picked Amazon to be your storage vendor, and you've sent semi trucks full of your data into their data centers, you're not shopping around for, oh, where should I run my ML? You're going to run your ML on AWS.

They can't fall crazy behind here, but I think this is one way that even though Google should be best positioned to have better ML offerings than anyone else, it doesn't matter if they're not the place where customers are storing their data.

David: Okay. One last element of the story before we transition to analysis. I don't think we can call this a coda because they failed. It's not a coda because they didn't do it.

Ben: It's a work in progress.

David: A work in progress. I think, justifiably so, this has been an AWS love fest. We've heaped so much praise on them. It's like they've done everything right. It's amazing. There's one thing they missed. Ben, do you want to tell us about it?

Ben: Data warehouses. How is Snowflake its own $50 billion company?

David: Unbelievable.

Ben: It stores data in AWS and other public clouds, and it is its own $50 billion company. What Amazon would tell you is we have Redshift, it's one of the fastest growing Amazon services ever, and it's doing really well. The databases team at Amazon, that whole org has to be very, very unhappy that Snowflake managed to run the gauntlet on the data warehouse market.

David: It's crazy that AWS did not do this.

Ben: It's probably AWS's biggest failure, and the question is, why? I think there are a few areas. One is just big company stuff. I think before launching something when you're at Amazon's scale, and now that they are the trusted partner of all these IT departments, you've got these security things, operational things, SLA guarantees that they're fully committed to. I think it hamstrings your ability to really streamline a product, be opinionated, and get something to market that's both fast, intuitive, and built for the user.

I think Redshift requires a lot of customization, whereas Snowflake is awesome for developers out of the box. It's funny that the playbook that Snowflake ran is pretty similar to the playbook that AWS ran when they were just S3 and EC2 serving individual developers. There's a little bit of, they're a victim of their own success on this front.

The other one, Ben Thompson pointed this out in a piece that we'll link to in the show notes. It's right there in the name, they're fighting Oracle. They're fighting the last battle with Redshift. It's, hey, take your Oracle-style data warehouse and basically do that in the cloud, rather than lots and lots of Snowflake customers never would have become Oracle customers.

It was a different customer segment with a different set of needs. It's just a fantastic product. That's not really who Amazon was serving. There's new leadership there now, they're getting the house in order, and I think they recognize this, but this was a whiff.

David: Probably not a whiff on the order of...

Ben: Microsoft and Google whiffing on cloud? Yeah. It's an order of magnitude or two smaller.

David: Yes. AWS, we're going to do analysis now, do grading. There's no way this isn't going to be a very high grade, but if there's a black mark, this is it.

Ben: The other thing where they're sort of a victim of their own success is the Amazon two-pizza team thing led them to launch all these different services. Rather than having a cohesive product strategy, AWS has kind of been alphabet soup. I haven't logged into the AWS dashboard in a while but it used to just be so overwhelming. So many amorphous logos that all feel like the same thing, where it's hard to disambiguate between two things.

I think Amazon realizes this because their keynotes now seem to be much more about pitching these vertical solutions. Like, here's this thing for this industry. Here's a vertical solution. Here are case studies of other people in your industry rather than first presenting you with, we have 476 services.

I think that in the keynotes, they've also really dialed back on what used to be the drumbeat of the keynote, which is, we launched what we consider to be 74 significant features this year, and we're excited to tell you all about them. I think that one for a long time, and now it's created so much confusion for customers that that's actually the bull case for a Google who is a newer entrant, who's coming in with a more cohesive product strategy, and can help customers really understand what they should be doing rather than being like, hey, there are no guardrails, good luck.

AWS keeps launching even more new services now to provide those guardrails and say, if you use whatever, whatever manager, then you can't get yourself into too much trouble. It's like, oh, cool, 13th standards body. They definitely have a little bit of that cleanup effort going on now. But hey, they got market leadership, and they make far more revenue and far more operating income than anyone else, so it's hard to argue with.

All right, listeners. This is a great time to share our next sponsor with you, something extremely unusual. This segment is brought to you by our great friends at NZS Capital.

David: They're just the best.

Ben: They are. We first chatted with Brinton, Brad, Joe, and John with the idea about doing a paid sponsorship. They jumped on it, but they gave us one very particular caveat because they're such learners. They said that the only thing we could ask listeners to do as a call to action is to read one of their white papers, think about it and offer feedback, and further refine the thesis.

This time, in contrast to our last two episodes, we're going to talk about a different white paper. For those of you who joined us for the talkback, that was awesome to get to talk to all of you with the NZS guys on the call.

David: That was so great about complexity and complexity investing, the founding thesis of the firm. Today, though, we're talking about their white paper redefining the margin of safety. We'll have a link in the show notes for folks to read it. It's a super cool concept.

Margin of safety, for folks who listened to our crazy 10-hour 3-part Berkshire Hathaway series last year, you'll remember that as an original Ben Graham concept. Of course, Warren and Charlie popularized it at Berkshire.

The idea is actually similar to NZS' core thesis, which is that you can't really predict the future as an investor or anybody else. Thus, the idea of having margin of safety in your investments in the Graham concept of it is around valuation, that gives you a wide leeway to be wrong.

Ben: Yes, in a very wide possible of scenarios rather than a very narrow set of scenarios, you're going to be okay and still may make a profitable investment. Of course, Graham's little simplistic viewpoint on this is if it's a high valuation relative to the business's fundamentals, it's a low margin of safety, and a low valuation gives you a high margin of safety. NZS is different. They believe valuation alone is insufficient to actually think through what the true margin of safety is.

David: They think about margin of safety really as focusing in today's fast changing world on the adaptability of the management team of a company. A management team that's highly adaptable is going to give you, as an investor in the company, a much higher degree of margin of safety if you believe that the pace of change out there is accelerating and things are going to be changing.

Valuation doesn't tell you much, but a management team's ability to adapt to changing conditions does. That's part one of their thesis here.

Part two, which is really cool, is that there's also a time element here. Not just management's capability to adapt, but what is the business cycle of the company that they're running?

If it's a super, super fast business cycle, you could have the best management team in the world at adaptability. They're just not going to have time to react. The likelihood that within a narrow window of time, they'll make the right choices, is low.

An example here is Groupon or Zynga. It wasn't maybe necessarily that the management teams didn't know how to adapt to changing conditions. It's just that the business cycle for those companies was so fast, they didn't have time to.

Ben: They actually use this analogy in the paper where they're saying, imagine that you're driving only two feet away from another car, and you're going quite fast. If they tap the brakes, you're screwed no matter how good of a driver you are. But of course, if you're at a safe distance and you give yourself time to react, then there could be a lot more margin of safety no matter what the price of the investment.

A little bit about NZS before we close here. They've got over a billion dollars under management. They're a global equity fund. They're a long-only. They manage money for institutional and accredited investors. They're just some of our very favorite thinkers.

They started the firm in 2019 and worked together for many, many years before that. If you find this stuff interesting, you should go read the whole white paper by clicking the link in the show notes. It is well worth the read. We say that just as fans of their ideas. We are not clients of the firm.

Finally, they do really, really, really want your feedback on this. If you got a bone to pick, if you want, understand it further and read the whole white paper, if you totally agree, click the link in the show notes. Go check out the white paper.You can email any of them. Their emails are on the white paper itself.

Or even better, we're going to do another Zoom call with them in October to talk about these ideas together. There is a second link in the show notes to add that to your calendar. We would love to see you there. Our thanks to NZS Capital.

David: Should we transition to analysis?

Ben: Yeah, let's start with power, because I think AWS is actually one of the best case studies in power of all time. A longtime listener to the show knows power is what enables a business to achieve persistent differential returns, or put another way to become more profitable than their closest competitor, and do so sustainably, so they can build enterprise value and be sustainably more profitable than their nearest competitor. David, when AWS broke out their financials, they were at, did you say 19%? 18%, 19% operating margins?

David: 19%.

Ben: Now they're at 30%. They've gotten more profitable when the landscape got more competitive.

David: How did that happen?

Ben: There's something going on there. There are a couple of things. Moore's Law is in their favor of all their COGS getting materially cheaper over time. If I had to guess, I think they're not discounting for customers as fast as they're realizing both economies of scale. Legitimately just cost coming down from Moore's law.

I think, actually, what's going on here is, it comes all the way full circle that Amazon is offering Platform as a Service offerings at this point and telling customers, hey, you could just keep using our primitive building blocks, but actually, what you should be doing to take advantage of the full power of the cloud, to run these Lambda functions, or to take advantage of these proprietary databases that are way faster, is to pay us a little bit more margin and take advantage of cloud native things. It's like, ah, the old tricks or the new tricks.

Now you're the incumbent and you're finding way to do margin expansion. The mindset a decade ago or almost two decades ago at this point of, oh, we need to create the platform of the future was right, but you needed to do Infrastructure as a Service as a stepping stone to get there. It turns out that Amazon did that and generated their 18% operating margins. Now, here they are in a more of a Platform as a Service world with customer lock in generating 30% margins.

David: It's funny. I'm looking at the list of seven powers here, which are for folks who are new, counter positioning, scale economies, switching costs, network economies, process, power branding, and cornered resource. I'm like, check, check, check, check, check.

Ben: Right? Early on in the take-off phase, counter positioning all over the place.

David: All over the place.

Ben: It was just straight up a business that the incumbents would never have done because it would have cannibalized themselves. Scale economies, this is probably the single greatest scale economies business of all time. I was trying to explore this idea of why now. Why did cloud happen in the late 2000s?

One answer is mobile, because as the computing devices get smaller, it acquires more of the computing to be done in the cloud. That's definitely accelerated this trend. The other one is Amazon was the first company to ever try and build data centers at this scale, because they needed them to run the largest web application, amazon.com, and cloud is not profitable unless you run it at absolute massive scale.

I think other people may have evaluated this business model in theory, but Amazon was the one that was practically in a position to do it and actually realize the scale economies, or I should say, economies of scale that would lead to the scale economy's power.

David: Yup, and it continues to feed itself now. Because Amazon's the biggest, they have the most surface area over which to spread out their capex and infrastructure costs. Thus, they can charge the lowest prices at similar or higher profit margins than their competitors.

Ben: It's amazing. Then you layer on the switching costs. Once people are semi trucking their data into your data centers, there are very real switching costs.

David: Amazon.com took 13 years to offload off of Oracle onto AWS. If that's not switching costs in this industry, I don't know what is.

Ben: Branding is very clear. By being the leader at this point, they're just winning. Even if people want to do the multi-cloud thing, they're basically like, cool. Do Amazon and one of the others. Their market leadership position.

When they say things like, this is the fastest growing Amazon service ever, they're reinforcing this idea of everyone else's and everything we launched, customers love. I do think people are totally willing to pay up at this point, because they just view it as this will cost us less in the long-term than if we make the wrong technology choice and then need to move again.

David: There are also the competitors. At this point, probably with Microsoft and Google, you can feel more safe. But for the longest time, their strategies were all over the place. As a customer, I don't have any trust that I can build on your cloud strategy and it's not going to completely change in the next several years.

Ben: Totally, totally agree.

David: Whereas Amazon has just been consistent.

Ben: Yup. I will say, I think a tailwind for Microsoft has been multi-cloud. This idea that, hey, you don't want vendor lock in, so you really should have some redundancy or spread out your infrastructure across multiple cloud providers. I think enterprises over the last 5–8 years really bought that narrative hook, line, and sinker. It's a reasonable narrative.

I remember, there's a parallel to mobile development here. When I was an iPhone developer, people were telling me, use PhoneGap. I'm like, why? Then I won't get to use any of the cool stuff that iOS lets you do, like the latest APIs and the lowest level hardware features. They're like, yeah, but then you don't need to write an Android app too, so your development costs are lower. I'd be like, well, but I'll make an app no one wants to use. So sure, my costs will be lower, but I won't get to make an actually interesting application.

I think there's some argument here in multi-cloud, where it's like, okay, cool, you're going to use everyone's Infrastructure as a Service. But more far enough in the development of cloud now where these vendors are doing actually interesting Platform as a Service things, so you do want to take advantage of that.

This is the Amazon argument, which they've argued in the last two keynotes that they started showing up magically in 2021 in keynotes, where they're realizing, oh, crap, multi-cloud is making it so that a bunch of the revenue that could be coming to us is going mostly to Microsoft, but a little bit to Google as people diversify this space.

Really, what we want to do is convince people. Actually, you'll save money, because you'll have less complexity to manage with multi-cloud, and you'll get the functionality of all the cool things that we're launching which require all the tight integration. Again, the thing that they were fighting against when they first launched now that they're the big incumbent...

David: They're running the playbook.

Ben: Yeah.

David: Of course, that's how it works.

Ben: The cycle of life.

David: I have a slight sidebar question. We talked about all the other big technology companies that whiffed on cloud. We didn't talk about Apple at all. Did they whiff on this too or is this something that's just like, this is not Apple?

Ben: It's a good question. It's not Apple the way I think of Apple. In fact, I even think iCloud's back end is Azure, or at least for a long time was Azure.

David: It was AWS. There was 16, maybe, New York Times article that came out, where they reported that it was AWS and Apple got very upset about it.

Ben: I bet. Apple basically doesn't serve enterprises. I know they sell laptops and phones to companies in bulk, and they have enterprise relationship managers for companies. But this is not Apple's wheelhouse. That said, Tim Cook's Apple is very different from the Apple that I hold in my head. Tim Cook's Apple is wherever there is durable, high margin revenue. This actually is Tim Cook's wheelhouse. I think if he had the sales force to go after this, I think he would do it.

David: I totally agree. Apple's a consumer technology company. Yeah, maybe they should be running their own iCloud data centers. No, probably not. But developers are so important to Apple. They are so and should be so close and in touch with developers.

Apple has had its own drawbacks of a high margin business model recently in a monopoly with their developer relationships. Mobile, like you said, was the first beachhead for the cloud. Should Apple have been offering something for developers there too? I don't know. It didn't happen, so it doesn't matter.

Ben: They have spun up something where you can build your applications in the cloud now, but I assume It's all just white labeled AWS or Microsoft.

David: Yeah. You never know with Apple, but I think the ship has sailed.

Ben: Yeah. I do know Facebook uses AWS.

David: Interesting.

Ben: Facebook has their own first party data centers that they operate, because they're obviously at such massive scale where that makes sense. But then they also use AWS for some stuff.

David: I'm trying to think about, does AWS have network economy power? I don't think so.

Ben: I don't either.

David: I don't think I care if you use AWS.

Ben: No, it's indirect. It shows up in scale economies, because my stuff gets cheaper because you use it.

David: I think that's the only of the big five of the seven powers, so not including process power and cornered resource, which are esoteric special cases. I think network economies is the only one that AWS doesn't have, but index is off the charts on the other four—counter positioning, scale economies, switching costs, and branding.

Ben: Yup.

David: Okay. We talked a little bit about what would have happened otherwise with Apple. We talked about it as we went along with the other big technology companies. Should we move on to playbook?

Ben: Yeah, let's do it. My first thing to highlight in playbook is a perfect transition from the Seven Powers, because I do think this is actually the best scale economy business of all time. Because the fixed costs are so enormous, you amortize them across a huge customer base, you're rewarded for that massive scale, and for making these ungodly large investments, for the first time, they just invested so much in building out new data centers for AWS.

They actually took Amazon cashflow negative. Their free cash flow is massively negative over the last 12 months because of these continued unbelievably large investments. I think this is a business that would have taken enormous scale to get to profitability at all.

Now that they have it, it's one of these self-fulfilling prophecies, where now that they're massively the market leader, they just have to keep going. There could be a self-inflicted wound or soccer people call it an own goal, but once you have this scale economies power going, I just think it's pretty hard to drop the ball at this point.

David: We've alluded to this for years on Acquired. We've talked about it a lot on this episode. AWS is a utility company. Think about what a utility company is. It's exactly what you described. It's the ultimate scale economy business.

It is something that requires so much capex that society as a whole decides that there should be a centralized provider of this. In most other utility cases, they are regulated by the government about how much profit margin they can take, because otherwise, they could take massively exorbitant profits and extort customers. AWS happens to be an unregulated utility for the Internet, which is maybe the biggest market of all time.

Ben: Well put. Here's the interesting point I want to make on that. There's that common refrain of like, wow, I can't believe Amazon. The ecommerce company became the cloud company. From this perspective, this is exactly the same thing, that the amazon.com retail business was—an ungodly amount of investment in the fulfillment network globally in order to sell stuff to a big group of customers in a massively amortized way. It's just a data center instead of a fulfillment center. They had the right mindset for this business.

David: It's actually a very similar business at scale.

Ben: Yes. Another one that I had is price cuts. This is not something we talked about in history and facts, but I do think it's worth calling out. By 2012, and keep in mind, they had very little competition up to this point, they had already done 23 price reductions across the board for all of their services. By 2013, they had done 40. By 2015, they had done 51. They were proactively, without competitive pressure, reducing prices.

The question is, why? It reminded me of TSMC. Speaking of Hamilton and Seven Powers in our conversation with him and Chenyi, he pointed out that it made sense for TSMC to proactively lower prices for customers in order to win business. What you're essentially doing there is you're giving up current day profit dollars to gain something in the future. That's the obvious part.

The less obvious part in the TSMC case is that since the cost to build out a new chip fab are so large and so lumpy, like $10 billion all at once, it's super advantageous to have that predictability of customer orders. On top of that, there's a finite number of the machines available to manufacture those high-end chips, the ones that ASML makes, so it pays doubly to be able to know for sure you can be one of the few to get those.

AWS has the same thing going on, whereas the ASML machines are much more scarce than the servers that AWS is buying. It's unbelievably helpful for AWS to win market share so they can do their thing and invest more in building out more data centers to keep that thing going. That proactive price drops works not quite as well as it does for TSMC, but they get rewarded for it for sure.

David: Yeah. This was such a good point from Hamilton. The strategy is not just to win business, it's to be able to feel confident about building out ahead of the curve on infrastructure to enable scale economies or further drive scale economies.

Ben: Here's a thing that is unfortunate about AWS relative to the amazon.com business, speaking of building out infrastructure. We talked about float in the amazon.com business. Customer makes an order, customer pays immediately, Amazon gets net 60 or so to pay a supplier. It's the opposite in cloud.

David: Right. This is why they have $100 billion revenue backlog. From this dimension, that's a terrible thing.

Ben: Amazon doesn't get this money up front. Their whole thing to customers is you don't have to pay up front to install servers. There are reserved instances, but there are ways that they try to get a little bit more upfront cash. But they have to go build these whole data centers buying all this real estate, buying those servers or leasing, however they structure them.

They've had to get creative with capital leases on the data centers instead of buying them upfront, so that they can make the data centers effectively pay as you go just like their revenue is pay as you go. They don't get the incredible business model, the negative cash conversion cycle thing that they have in the retail business in AWS. I think that's important to understand. While this business is much higher margin, their effective cost of capital is higher.

David: I guess, Amazon stock price, I don't think dropped that much. But people freaked out this past quarter when Amazon reported the hugely negative cash flow. And this is why. That is also why you shouldn't be that worried about it. But compared to their retail business that has a negative cash cycle, this is a less attractive element of the AWS business model.

Ben: Yup. All right. Another one I had is I was reading from friends of the show, Tegus. They had this great transcript that I was reading from a former AWS business development person on the obsession around multi-cloud. It got me thinking a lot around multi-cloud.

The evolution of what cloud means has completely changed. When cloud first started, it meant use these primitive building blocks in our data center, our being Amazon, and pay as you go. What it has evolved to mean is use our cloud services, which exists now at a higher level of abstraction, and some of which are proprietary. And it doesn't actually have to be in our data center.

The interesting thing about where a multi-cloud and hybrid cloud is going, multi-cloud being Amazon and Microsoft, and hybrid cloud being in your data center and in our data center. In the most recent AWS keynote, they announced a bunch of services which are AWS cloud services that run in your data center, where Amazon employees come and install servers and maintain servers in your data center.

David: It's the old Oracle business model all over again.

Ben: Right? They're like, well, it is great because you get access to Lamda right there in the cloud. You're like, sorry, what? How's it in the cloud? They're like, yeah, because it's AWS Lambda. It's cloud because it's Lambda, but it's in your data center, it's in the cloud. I'm like, what do these words even mean anymore?

It was funny. Reading this transcript really made me start to contemplate, what is cloud even now? Because it also exists in multiple clouds and your data center. It really actually ends up being about the set of proprietary services that you're building your application on rather than where it's running.

David: I guess these days, it means back to the beginning of the episode. It means you're IT infrastructure, you are calling via an API. I think that's what cloud means.

Ben: Yup. Someone's going to finish this episode and be like, well, I thought I knew what the cloud was. Then Ben and David talked for three hours, and now I don't know what it is anymore.

David: Yeah. You know it when you see it.

Ben: Yup. All right, another one, make something people want. This is the YC slogan, but this is exactly what Amazon did. I think Microsoft and Google both wanted to build something that they thought would be an amazing business model and something that was very clever to them as technologists. What Amazon decided to do is figure out what startups wanted to build on, figure out what IT managers wanted to lift and shift to, and just build that.

It's boring, but it comes through in all these keynotes. Every single thing has a customer use case attached to it, a customer use case that drove them to develop it. It's funny how they refuse to do things like, for the longest time, people are like, why aren't you doing anything in blockchain?

Andy Jassy's comment on stage is he's like, we don't really understand the customer use case yet. This was in 2015 or 16. This is six years before the recent buzz around Web3 use cases. I just think they're so focused on that as the very first question you have to ask before investing a single dollar of engineering resources. It's just very impressive.

David: Whereas in that same timeframe, didn't Microsoft have those ads with common blockchain in the cloud, on Microsoft? IBM was doing a corporate blockchain.

Ben: Yeah. They eventually did roll something out that was like, this isn't a blockchain, but we think that accomplishes the same thing that you people who are asking for block chain–based enterprise infrastructure are asking for.

David: Interesting.

Ben: My next one is about asymmetric upside. This is another Bezos letter that I'm going to quote from 2015 where he says, "Given a 10% chance of 100 times payoff, you should make that bet every time, but you're still going to be wrong 9 times out of 10. We all know that if you swing for the fences, you're going to strike out a lot, but you're also going to hit some home runs.

The difference between baseball and business, however, is that a baseball has a truncated outcome distribution. When you swing, no matter how well you connect with the ball, the most runs you can ever get is four. In business, every once in a while, when you step up to the plate, you can score a thousand runs. This long tail distribution of returns is why it's important to be bold. Big winners pay for so many experiments."

David: Market size unconstrained.

Ben: Market size unconstrained.

David: I think that's got to be like a catchphrase on Acquired that we should incorporate.

Ben: Oh, for sure. Let's put it on some merch.

David: Yeah.

Ben: This is the year after he makes the market size unconstrained comment about AWS. I just think it's such a perfect illustration. A lot of people make fun of certain venture capital investments. I'm only interested in the ones people are making fun of, because the whole point of venture capital is seeking these crazy asymmetric longtail returns.

I think Jeff Bezos got that better than most VCs do. He's a phenomenal, high beta capital allocator. In running a company, he was also a very good operational CEO and also an actual genius.

All of these things, there are lots to say about Jeff Bezos. He's absolutely a genius. He's absolutely a brilliant operator. But maybe even more than these things, he just gets capital allocation. That's why I think Amazon is effectively the highest performing venture returns in history. AWS is a venture bet in their portfolio that they own 100% of.

David: Also that quote, what did he say? "In baseball, you have truncated returns"?

Ben: A truncated outcome distribution.

David: Truncated outcome distribution. That's the most Jeff Bezos thing ever.

Ben: Right.

David: I'm sure that Aaron Judge is thinking that, because the place is like, oh, if only I didn't have a truncated outcome distribution. It's so great, which also reminds me sidebar, because we're deep in the episode here. Watching the re:Invent keynote with Reed Hastings, it's been so long since we did our two Netflix series.

Ben: Yeah, we need a part three.

David: When was that? It was years ago, but I think they're still really good. It'd be fun to go back and relisten to them. Reed Hastings is a huge nerd.

Ben: Oh, yeah. He started his career doing a data storage company.

David: Yes. I think of him now as like, oh, Reed Hastings CEO and founder of Netflix. He's a business guy like Bezos. No, he's a true geek.

Ben: He's an engineer, and his engineering project is his company.

David: Yes. I mean that in the highest possible compliment.

Ben: Those people are the people you could listen to talk forever, because they speak with such precision about their strategy, because it's actually thought through to a layer deeper than the platitude and stuff you normally hear.

David: Yup.

Ben: All right, here's my last one. You brought it up earlier in the episode, and I wanted to save it to the end of playbook, because I think it contrasts my takeaway from the last episode.

I use this analogy that Amazon would quickly spin something up, learn from it, and if it wasn't the right thing, kill it and take the learnings to do the next thing. I think I called that brute force maze finding or pathfinding.

AWS is different. They don't really have a Fire Phone or zShops. The biggest reason for this is when you launch a service for enterprise customers, it is really hard to kill it. You burn customer trust. Actually, if you think about what's the bigger risk, burning the trust and losing the customer and all their future revenue, or having to maintain a crappy service that didn't work? You just maintain the service.

David: Right. It's such a good point.

Ben: There are stuff that didn't live up to the full potential, like all the productivity applications they've ever tried, WorkMail...

David: Chime.

Ben: Their IoT offering, Greengrass. I think IoT just didn't pan out the way that everyone wanted it to. They launched something in 2013 called AppStream to run mobile apps in the cloud. The commitment to maintaining these things is just completely different in AWS than in the consumer business. The biggest illustration is SimpleDB.

DynamoDB comes out, it's way more performant. It has a similar job to be done. SimpleDB had all kinds of cost issues for Amazon, but there were customers using it, so they kept it up. I think one of those customers was even Netflix. They just didn't want to deprecate something that customers were using.

David: Yeah. This is why you'd log on to the AWS product page and there are 200 services there. It's such a good point. It's not worth it to them to kill anything.

Ben: Yup. All right, grading?

David: Do we even really need to discuss this?

Ben: We could be like, okay, plus, we're done. Actually, I'm going to stretch this out from just AWS and talk about all of Amazon.

David: Okay, great.

Ben: To evaluate it going forward. What is a market cap?

David: Market cap unconstrained.

Ben: What is value? What is money? What is market cap? Market cap is the sum of all future cash flows discounted to the present day at some discount rate. The long-term, the market is a weighing machine, even if the short-term is a voting machine. Thank you to Warren Buffett.

Amazon has a $1.5 trillion market cap. They had a five-year run where they generated some cash, and then the pandemic hit, and they made a bunch of reinvestments. Now, they're certainly not generating cash. Up until 2015, they broke even. They know how to do one thing really, really, really well, which is reinvest every single dollar into growing.

I'm very curious what this business looks like when they stopp doing that. At some point, will they see when they're actually saturating all their total addressable markets and ease back on growth so that they can generate the maybe hundreds of billions of dollars in profits per year they need to justify this market cap?

If you're worth $1.5 trillion, it does suppose that you're spitting off $100 billion a year or somewhere on that order of cash, which we've never seen them do or come close to doing. Either they need to continue operating the way that they have and continue finding more AWSes, or at some point, they need to realize, oh, there's the edge of the TAM, let's start generating a ton of cash, even though we've never known how to do that before.

David: I think on the last episode, I said, if, but of course, when we had to interview Jeff Bezos, the question I really want to ask him is, is it still day one? Is it day two? Why did you retire? All that stuff.

You raised an interesting point. Amazon, as a company, as a whole, is just sort of architected. Jeff would say, I told you guys all along, is architected to always be a day-one company. It needs to always keep growing.

Ben: Yes. At some point, that bumps up against the GDP of the world. You can't actually do that indefinitely, unless the GDP of the world keeps growing at a faster rate than Amazon's growth, which is definitely not true. Amazon's a much higher growth company than the world's GDP.

At some point, a billion years from now, we're all dead, and the earth gets absorbed by the sun anyway, so don't project out this far. But I am curious, if you held Amazon indefinitely until the company no longer existed, which it will at some point, will you actually realize $1½ trillion of value?

David: Yeah, that's a good point. Maybe this is part of Jeff stepping back and Andy Jassy becoming CEO of the whole company.

Ben: It's to actually figure out how to do that.

David: Yeah. I can imagine that that's a challenge that I'm totally projecting here into Jeff Bezos' mind. It's always a dangerous thing to do, in part, because it's so much more expansive than anybody who would try to project into it. I bet that's not something he's personally very interested in figuring out.

Ben: Right. I think it's a great point. I mean, I think in the 12 months leading up to June of 2020, they generated $27 billion of free cash flow. They know how to generate cash.

I thought they were on the path starting (I think) in 2015–2016 is when they really started actually becoming free cash flow positive and growing that year over a year. That just stopped when the pandemic hit. Maybe we're in some temporary anomaly that they'll go back to the 2019 mode here shortly, or maybe the anomaly was the last five years before Covid.

David: Andy, I think, has said on recent earnings calls, hey, we're going to be moving back towards profitability. We know how to do this. Don't freak out.

Ben: Yeah. That's the exact opposite message of what Jeff Bezos said in the 2020 letter when Covid hit.

David: Didn't he say buckle your seatbelt?

Ben: Yeah. He said, if you're a share owner in Amazon, you may want to take a seat.

David: Great.

Ben: Yup.

David: He's such a cowboy. Like we talked about, he wears the cowboy boots.

Ben: Truly. Anyway, that's a thought experiment exercise. To actually grade it, it was an activity of new market creation that just completely worked and invented one of the biggest markets of all time, and then became the leader in that, and managed to have no competition for the first five years, and then stave off everyone coming after them pretty sickly, permanently. They own just little enough of this market that it's not a regulatory concern. if they owned 80% of cloud, it probably would be worse for them, long-term.

David: Here's the question. Was Amazon strategic in letting Microsoft back in the game?

Ben: No, I don't think so. I think that's too difficult of a future to see to cannibalize current day.

David: I'm sure they're worried about antitrust and regulation.

Ben: Yeah. It's the same way that Google looks at Bing, I'm sure, which is like, thank God that exists.

David: All right, what's your grade?

Ben: It's an A+, but grading is a silly exercise. I almost want to cut it from these types of episodes. I do think the interesting question is that I do want to continue to ponder for a while is, if you held Amazon ad infinitum and you own 100% of the company, would you ever be profitable on your business to buy it for $1½ trillion?

David: It's the Warren Buffett, Ben Graham, a stock is a piece of a business. If you were able to buy the whole company of amazon.com for $1.5 trillion, is that a good use of capital?

Ben: Yeah, it's a great question.

David: I think it probably is.

Ben: That's where I thought you're going.

David: I'm a little biased here, but come on. Yeah, A+ for me. Get out of here. This division of this company has $100 billion of contracted revenue. A+, we're done.

Ben: David thinks the stock's cheap.

David: Yeah. Carveouts, what do you got?

Ben: Yes, carveouts. Mine is a very enjoyable show that I watch on Disney+ is a Marvel show called Moon Knight. I would say it's not the best show that I've seen on Disney+, but it is the best acting that I have seen in any of the Marvel Cinematic Universe shows.

David: Ah, nice.

Ben: I still think Loki is probably the best written, and what was the one with the Scarlet Witch?

David: Oh, Wanda Vision.

Ben: Wanda Vision, also very good.

David: That was good.

Ben: Fantastic writing. I would say this is almost to those calibers, but definitely a notch below. Oscar Isaac playing the lead role is some of the best acting I've seen in any TV or movie ever. The writing is entertaining enough where you can just sit there and enjoy his performance in a way that feels Broadway-level theatrical. I did not appreciate him as an actor until this.

David: Wait, is he...

Ben: Poe Dameron.

David: Yeah, that's what I was going to say. I was like, he's done other Disney Star Wars stuff.

Ben: He's also done some other crazy roles. I think he's in Ex Machina.

David: Ah. Have you watched any of the new Star Wars stuff?

Ben: I just finished Obi Wan Kenobi and was deeply unenthused.

David: Ah, bummer.

Ben: I enjoyed it as a Star Wars fan. Just more Star Wars is awesome. Getting to see Obi Wan in different age is awesome, but I think they took away from the gravitas of his character, I guess. Okay, spoiler alert. Please stop this if you've not seen Obi Wan Kenobi yet. It's going to be spoilery, where I'm not going to tell you the end of the series, but I'm going to tell you what the series is about.

It's about the period of time between when he arrives on Tatooine at the end of episode three, but before A New Hope. In A New Hope, there's all this great gravitas given this idea that like, wow, he came here and he's been living in a cave, marooned and away from all this stuff forever since we last saw him.

David: Yeah, he's the old hermit Ben, right?

Ben: Right. He brings Luke to Tatooine and then that's his responsibility. This is a whole galactic adventure that takes place...

David: He's like Han Solo.

Ben: Where he leaves Tatooine and comes back—I won't spoil things too much—with very, very major characters, where Obi Wan has interactions with them and big material fights that totally would change the character dynamic and the level of import put on his character on Tatooine in a way where it feels like it cheapened the canon to date by this existing.

David: I have not watched any of the new stuff, but I feel like Lucasfilm just needs a new start. It doesn't feel like it's going in a good direction.

Ben: The IP also doesn't really lend itself well to serials. I don't know. Maybe that's not true. I did really like the Mandalorian. I liked when Boba Fett tried to become the Mandalorian by being like, ooh, Boba Fett is not that good. Let's just make it the Mandalorian again.

David: That could be a deficit for another day.

Ben: Moon Knight, Oscar Isaac, go watch it.

David: Awesome. My carveout is one that if you are listening to this now, I'm pretty sure you're gonna love this. I have a high degree of confidence in the affinity overlap between people listening right now and the carve out that I'm about to say, which is Lex Fridman's 5½-hour interview with John Carmack. It's so good.

Ben: It's awesome.

David: Carmack is just a legend.

Ben: I'm an hour in and it's great.

David: It's so, so good. Not knowing that that was coming, having just recently listened to the audiobook of Masters of Doom.

Ben: It was made for you. It's perfect.

David: I'm just in heaven. Reading Masters of Doom and now listening to this episode, this interview with Carmack makes me actually want to go either talk to or find out more from John Romero, how he thinks about things, and his history of id.

Carmack actually says In the beginning of the interview with Lex, John Romero is better at talking about the history of id and being the keeper of that than I am. They have a nice moment. I'm halfway through the interview with Lex where he talks about the relationship with Romero, became super strained, and then blew up. When id blew up, I think they've reconciled and it's nice.

Anyway, the whole thing, Carmack is just one of those people that operates on a different level than most of humanity, at least in the technical realm. It's very interesting that he did VR, he was at Oculus, and part of Facebook and Meta. The thing that he's working on now is AI. In particular, artificial general intelligence. That's a great interview.

Ben: Sweet. Can't wait to finish it. All right, listeners. Thank you so much to Fundrise, Pilot, and NZS Capital. Links for all three of those are available in the show notes, as well as a link to register for our NZS Talkback. The first one was super fun and can't wait to do a second one with them on this white paper as well.

After you finish this episode, come discuss it with all of us, 13,000 strong now, in the Acquired Slack community at acquire.fm/slack. Pick yourself up a sweet shirt, tank, hoodie, crewneck, or onesie at acquired.fm/store.

You can totally become an acquired LP and get early access to our LP episodes acquired.fm/lp or just get them when they're public. Search the podcast player of your choice for acquired LP Show.

Our latest episode will be live there soon with Nat Manning of Kindergarten Venture's fame and of Kettle as well. Honestly, reinsurance is fascinating, and I never would have thought I would have said that.

David: As is enterprise IT infrastructure.

Ben: Amen. All right, listeners, have a good one. See you next time.

David: We'll see you next time.

Ben: Welcome to season 7, episode 8, the season finale of Acquired, the podcast about great technology companies, and the stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert and I'm the co-founder of Pioneer Square Labs, a startup studio and venture capital firm in Seattle.

David: And I'm David Rosenthal and I am an angel investor and startup advisor based in San Francisco.

Ben: We are your hosts. Today, we cover the hottest and most anticipated company to IPO in 2020. Oddly, in a year marred by the global pandemic and just this month an all-time high number of stay-at-home orders, this hot IPO is a travel company. Airbnb—originally known as AirBed and Breakfast Incorporate—is going public today raising over $3.5 billion, and initially valued at over $47 billion. The company is insanely impressive. They operate in 220 countries and 100,000 cities. Last year, there were $38 billion of bookings made on the platform. There are over 50 million active guests who book nights to stay at over 7 million listings.

Unlike other companies that we've covered recently—yesterday, like DoorDash—this is truly a global company with 86% of hosts outside of the United States. And yet—while this company has changed the world and how a meaningful fraction of the human race travels—their growth has been slowing more severely than any of the other unicorn IPOs we've covered. That's before even looking at the effects of the global pandemic.

Now, of course, David and I did our usual deep homework on the company, but this is one where we've been doing our research for years. Not just as guests on the platform since 2010, but actually as hosts too, starting in 2015 for David and 2017 for me. Does Airbnb see its market saturation on the horizon, or is this a global community movement that’s still getting started? Today we dive.

David: Indeed, we do.

Ben: As always, if you love Acquired and you want to hone your own craft of company building, you should join the community of Acquired Limited Partners. On our LP show last week, David and I did a first for us and had our own actual limited partners, investors in our current and former funds on the show. Jaclyn Hester and Lindel Eakman from Foundry Group joined us for part IV of our VC fundamental series where we went seriously deep on the topic of portfolio construction for a venture capitalist.

Sure, this is a useful thing for aspiring VCs, current VCs to hone their thinking on that. But if you're a founder or an employee at a startup, I think understanding the incentives and strategy of your investors—big stakeholders in your company—and your potential future investors, it's just insanely valuable. It’s really awesome to have them on. Fun to be diving so deep on this topic and sharing a lot of these conversations with so many of you.

If you aren't already an Acquired limited partner, you can click the link in the show notes or go to acquire.fm/lp, and all the listeners get a 7-day free trial.

Now, on to our presenting sponsor for all of season 7, Tiny and its founder, Andrew Wilkinson. Alright Andrew, for our last episode of the season, we've talked a lot about the strategy and philosophy behind Tiny. Let's get super tactical. If someone were to do a deal, what does the process look like?

Andrew: It's super simple. They just have to send us an email and tell us a little bit about their business. We'll ask a few questions. Typically, we’ll make an offer within seven days and we’ll close within 30. It's very, very simple. The diligence that we do is in-depth, but most of it is really digging through Stripe or credit card processing and looking at financials and stuff. We really just try and cut all the BS out of it.

If someone's ever-curious or they're thinking about doing this, they don't need to overthink it. They can always just call us up or email us and walk us through it, and we won't waste their time. We’ll tell them what we realistically would pay. If they're interested, they can do it, and if it doesn't make sense then, no worries.

Ben: That's great. I can say, it's been fascinating learning about you and about Tiny and about the way you do business over the course of the season. Thank you so much for being our season 7 sponsor.

Andrew: Of course, I'm a huge fan and a long time listener, so it's cool to be here.

Ben: It's been a great season with Tiny. And if you are contemplating a sale or even wondering what it might look like in the future for your wonderful internet business if you did sell, you should reach out and just tell them that Ben and David from Acquired sent you. You can learn more at tinycapital.com or by clicking the link in the show notes. All right David, Airbnb, take us in.

David: It's time. Is it ever time? This company is 13 years old. Come on, it’s like a teenager.

Ben: We thought it was going to be time for a while now and here on the bar mitzvah of Airbnb, it goes public.

David: That's right. One quick disclaimer before we get going. In this case with Airbnb, I actually know and have worked with several people who are involved in the story in my past history at my previous venture capital firm. I haven't talked to any of them about the IPO or about this episode. They're all great, and I'm sure they're very, very happy today. Just so everyone knows, I don't own any Airbnb stock or any stock in any of its competitors, and I'm not planning to buy any.

Ben: As always, the show is not investment advice, but we thought it was extra important for us to highlight that neither of us are shareholders going into recording.

David: Indeed. We do have a very big thank you to shout out though—again, as so often on the show—Brad Stone and his wonderful book, The Upstarts, where he chronicled much of this history that we're going to borrow from. Brad is a wonderful past guest here of us on Acquired. With that, let's dive in.

Ben: Let's do it.

David: Ben, stop me if you've heard this one before.

Ben: Wait, the story of Airbnb’s founding? I’ve never heard of it.

David: Okay. A group of friends from New England—one of whom is from Harvard and the other two with a design and adventurous background—start a company in the early 2000s with a mission to connect people and facilitate interesting experiences. They're going to accomplish that mission by having people stay with other people in the site's homes.

Ben: RISD, design conference, South by Southwest—I think I know where this is going.

David: They built trust on the site with reviews. You can review each other. They discovered that photos are really important for listings. They had photos. They figured out how to authenticate real identities. It starts to take off. People start using it.

Ben: You’re going through this way faster than I would have expected.

David: I know, we got to get through a lot here. It seems totally crazy at the time to everyone—including Silicon Valley. They raised money from one of the very best venture capital firms—Story venture capital firm in Silicon Valley. Of course, I'm not talking about Airbnb. I am talking about Casey Fenton, Daniel Hoffer, and the crew at couchsurfing.com. The venture firm that I'm talking about is Benchmark, and the partner who led that deal was Matt Kohler of a little company like Facebook and Instagram fame.

Ben: CouchSurfing had that many similarities with Airbnb?

David: They had a lot of similarities, but there was one thing that was missing. It turns out that that was one of the key things that made CouchSurfing roughly the equivalent of—for those who listened to the Uber episode of the—I can’t remember if it was Uber, Lyft, or both. I think Uber, the HomeMobil story.

Ben: I think Uber, good question. I don't know.

David: I think it was Uber where we did HomeMobil, which of course pioneered ridesharing. CouchSurfing didn't have a way to pay the money.

Ben: They didn’t facilitate the payments?

David: They didn't facilitate the payments, and the idea was everybody was just going to do this out of the goodness of their heart for their community. I think, for a long time, the only monetization that happened on CouchSurfing was you paid essentially a verification fee to have your identity verified. I think the way they did that was they took a credit card payment and then matched your name with the name on the credit card. That was the only way they made money.

Actually, the similarities to HomeMobil don't end there. CouchSurfing was—for a long time—actually registered 501(c)(3) nonprofit. And then they had to convert from a nonprofit into a C-Corp when they raised money. It was a whole mess.

Ben: I mean it makes sense it was a nonprofit because in my head—the way I always thought about CouchSurfing and I think when I first heard about Airbnb, I sort of equated it with the same thing of literally a stranger who’ll just let you crash while you're, I don’t know. At this time, I was a college student. I see it's for other college students, or interns, or whatever who don't have money and you can just stay on some stranger's couch.

David: Yup, which I think was how CouchSurfing started. I think Casey was a college student and going on a trip. Did you ever use it? I looked at it, but I’ve never used it.

Ben: No, I definitely considered it, but it always felt a little bit, can I just get a cheap hotel? Do I know anyone in that city that I actually know?

David: Yeah. It's kind of crazy staying on a stranger’s couch. The really crazy part—this is getting ahead of ourselves—it turns out, Brian and Joe actually had dinner with Casey and Daniel right before they applied to YC and talked to them about what they were doing.

Ben: Which was after, of course, they had already started and were working on Airbnb.

David: Yeah. They talked about the two sites. Anyway, on to the real story of Airbnb. The year is 200. We are back in New England, specifically in Providence, Rhode Island where a scrappy freshman from Georgia named Joe shows up at the famous Rhode Island School of Design, RISD—a wonderful place. I didn't realize, I actually was in Providence last year. RISD and Brown, they’re like co-located. Providence is a very small town. So Brown and RISD, all the buildings are kind of interspersed. It’s actually a very cute little place.

Joe shows up as a freshman and he meets and befriends a sophomore there. Joe is scrappy. I don’t know if skinny is the right word. He's a sleight of frame, let's put it that way. His friend who meets is a beefy hockey player and—I don't know if it was at this or after college—an aspiring bodybuilder. He would go around and compete in bodybuilding competitions, a sophomore from Upstate New York. Of course, we're talking about the one and only Brian Chesky here.

They’re both at RISD. I don't know other than my one visit to Providence. I haven't spent a ton of time at RISD or with people from RISD, but my impression is it's like a very artsy kind of place.

Ben: Yeah, it makes sense. In my head, I remember early on hearing of so and so went to RISD. To me, it always signaled upper echelon design school—very talented, but also a very independent thinking crowd.

David: I don't necessarily think of it as commercial. I think green hair, counter-culture. I could be wrong on that, but that's the impression I have.

Ben: Business and tech guys here pontificating on how to label a design school.

David: Indeed. Whether that was the case or not, that certainly was not the mold that Joe and Brian fit at RISD. They become fast friends and get into all sorts of hijinks. They're always talking about doing different projects, starting businesses together, and they must have stood out because they became super popular. Joe actually became student body president of RISD. He’s a year behind Brian. Brian—at graduation—was elected by the class to give the graduation speech when they graduate.

The story goes, when Brian is graduating after this speech, Joe is still there. He has another year at RISD. He takes Brian out to dinner before he leaves and says, we've got this thing. One day, I predict that we're going to start a company together, you and me, and somebody's going to write a book about this. Of course, they’re telling this to the author who is writing the book about them. Whether it's true or not, we will never know, but it becomes very apt.

After Brian graduates in 2004, he moves to the west coast. He moves to Los Angeles and he gets a job working for a design consultancy there called 3D-ID. But it's kind of not the best fit for him.

Ben: Didn’t he design any chairs or something?

David: Yeah, he’s designed chairs and medical products. They're a product design consultancy, and he's a junior designer there. It's not very glamorous, and he doesn't think this is the life for him. At the same time—this is going into 2005-2006—YouTube got started. I remember I was in college when YouTube got started. This site is amazing. This thing is happening on the internet. You can watch videos and movies and anybody can post them. The guys who started it came out of PayPal, young guys. They are backed by Sequoia. Brian starts researching them. He becomes obsessed. He’s like, that's what I want my life to be like.

Meanwhile Joe—the next year in 2005—graduates from RISD. He's not sure what he wants to do with his life either. He actually starts a company. I guess you could call it a company, it still exists today. It's called a CritBuns. Joe’s talked about this a lot. We will beg you to listen to the How I Built This episode, he talks about this with Guy.

I guess the story is as part of the curriculum at RISD, one of the key things that you do is you have these design critiques in your classes. You design something, everybody in the class, the professors are all critique and you sit around. I guess this goes on for a long time, and there are non-comfortable chairs. So Joe has this idea that he makes literally butt-shaped foam cushions that you can carry around with you and you can put down on the floor, on a bench, or whatever and then be more comfortable during critiques, hence CritBuns.

Ben: Amazing. This is still up, right?

David: Still up. I don't know if I’ve written down their website. We’ll link to it in the show notes. You can go online and order CritBun.

Ben: It’s critbuns.com, and it is in its full web 1.5 glory. I think it was on the front page of USA Today, and they have a big area of their site dedicated to letting you know that.

David: Obviously. And of course, by they, we mean Joe. It's not really a company per se. Joe goes around Providence and tries to get the bookstore in town to carry them. I don't know if he actually succeeds, but if he does, he's not moving a lot of product, let's put it that way. In 2006, he finally gave in and he moved out to San Francisco. He always wanted to move to San Francisco. He gets an internship and then a full-time job at Chronicle Books, a famous book publisher here in San Francisco and he's working. He's designing book packaging and marketing materials for them.

He, with a couple of roommates, rents an apartment in the then—this is crazy to remember now—sort of up and coming, but mostly still an incredibly sketchy area in the South of Market neighborhood in San Francisco better known today as SoMa. I remember at the time, he had friends out here in San Francisco and my wife, Jenny was from here. I came out and visited and you didn't go to SoMa. It was a real sketchy place. It's still kind of a sketchy place but has transformed incredibly since then, of which Airbnb is a big part of.

Joe's now living in San Francisco, Brian’s in LA. Remember he’s not super happy. They’re still in really good touch. One day, in 2007, Joe sends Brian a package down to LA with an object in it, with a message behind it. Brian opens up the package, there's a CritBun in the package. As the story goes—at least as told to Brad—the point of the CritBun—other than I'm sure just to be hijinks and ironic—was, hey, let's take another shot at this. It's time to do this together—start a company. We’re not meant to be employees. Let’s go do this.

Brian comes up to San Francisco after receiving the CritBun to visit and stay with Joe. When he's there, it turns out one of Joe’s roommates—this tall programmer guy named Nate—who went to Harvard, but he's working at this really weird language tutoring company at the time called [...] and doesn't really seem to be going anywhere. Nate’s moving out of the apartment. Joe is like, we need another roommate. Why don't you just leave your job down in LA come up here and move in with us? Brian’s up there visiting, he has a great time. He wants to do it, but he’s not sure. He goes back to LA, thinks about it for a while.

Finally, at the beginning of September in 2007 when Nate finally moved out that month, Brian’s like, I’m going to do it. He quits his job, moves up to San Francisco, he moves into the apartment, but there's a problem. You've replaced Nate, this programmer who had a job, who is making money with this guy Brian, who’s a designer, who doesn't have a job. A roommate is only as good as they are for the rent money, and Brian and Joe need to make the rent. They're thinking about something to do.

It turns out, the next month, one of the big international design conferences is happening in San Francisco, the World Design Congress. Anybody who's traveled to San Francisco for all the big conferences that happen nowadays, they're all tech conferences that happen at the Moscone Center. The hotel situation in this city is nuts. It is completely awful.

Ben: WWDC has since moved down to the South Bay and now online. But I remember looking at hotel rooms for the week of WWDC before it got announced because people are speculating on what week it would be and rates were still like 5x what you would expect them to be because people are pre-anticipating. There are clearly not enough hotel rooms.

David: The thing that you figure out if you live here and you don't have family friends you want to visit is—that's just not WWDC, that's literally every week. Every week, there is a big event going on at the Moscone Center or elsewhere in the city. There just aren't enough hotels here for demand. Hotel rates can be like $1000+ a night during the week because there is always a conference going on of some type. They start cooking up an idea and Joe sends Brian an email. Why he sent this over email when they're living together, I don't know, but he sent him a very famous email.

Ben: They knew that we're going to be doing a podcast one day and they wanted to leave a paper trail.

David: They were thinking about an author writing the book, so there we go. The subject of the email is subletter. It reads, “Brian, I thought of a way to make a few bucks - turning our place into “designer's bed and breakfast,” - offering young designers who come into town a place to crash during the four-day event, complete with wireless internet, a small desk space, sleeping mat and breakfast each morning. Ha! Joe.”

Ben: Ha!

David: Ha indeed.

Ben: I’m going to start ending emails with that and see if that's the magic that made it all work.

David: I never really liked best or cheers, all the standard. You just end with Ha, I like that. Ha! Great. It was a pretty good ha. They take three days to put together www.airbedandbreakfast.com on WordPress, and then they email out a bunch of design blogs that they read to get some publicity. They said, all the people that read your site that come into town for the conference can’t afford hotels, especially young broke designers like us. Come stay with us on mats—I don't know where the mats came from, maybe like yoga mats or something—in this apartment.

Ben: I knew airbeds, like Airbnb.

David: Well, they called it Airbed and Breakfasts.

Ben: Do they mean airbeds, or do they mean mats?

David: I assume maybe they meant as they were working on the idea came up with AirBed and Breakfast, maybe they went out and got some airbeds. They mail this out in surprise. People were like, this is cool. What a novel idea? They're right about it. They get a few takers. They have either two or three, I can't recall how many guests stayed with them that weekend. One, in particular, a young recent Arizona state grad from India named Amal [...] rents one of these airbeds and/or mats for $80 a night. He comes and stays with them, and they become friends. They attend the conference together, they hang out. Joe gives him a tour of the city. It's really a great experience.

At the end of the stay, Amal is staying for an extra day after the conference, and he really wants to go down and see the famous d.school at Stanford, not yet famous for having helped produce DoorDash as we talked about in our episode yesterday, but still pretty famous nonetheless especially in the design circles. There's this famous tie between the d.school and IDEO—the design agency. They all drive down together to Stanford and they attend a lecture by Bill Moggridge who is one of IDEO’s founders, and this is a cool experience.

Afterward, Brian goes up to Bill and just starts pitching him. We got Amal here. We’re designers. We have airbedandbreakfast.com. It's really hard for young starving designers to go to conferences. I think Bill might have been on the board of the Industrial Designer Society of America or something like this. Do you think we could become the official accommodation provider for the Industry Association? It’s unclear what Bill's reaction was but AirBed and Breakfast did not become the official accommodations provider.

Ben: I love it, always pitching, always selling.

David: Always be hustling. This happens, the conference ends, and they have this amazing experience. You’d think, this is the thing, this is what we're going to do. No, they don't. That was a good way to make some money during the conference. What are we actually going to do?

They start brainstorming some ideas. They rope Nate—who they were still friends with even though he’d left the apartment—back in to start working with them on this since he's actually a developer. He left [...] at this point and he's freelancing. He's working on side projects thinking about what his next gig is going to be. They start brainstorming ideas.

One thing that they think about is roommate matching because they may be inspired by AirBed and Breakfast, this was so cool. Obviously, temporary roommates, that's not very big, maybe permanent roommates, that's what we need.

Ben: To be totally clear, was AirBed and Breakfast a website that they stood up for their apartment, or was it like a platform for any designer with an apartment to have other designers stay with them?

David: That's a good question. I think it was only their apartment. I'm not 100% sure on that. There were no other hosts during that design conference.

Ben: Got it.

David: It was a platform of one. We’ve talked about Nate a little bit. It turns out he has a pretty interesting and very relevant background. He had gone to Harvard, majored in Computer Science at Harvard, right around the same time as Brian and Joe were at RISD. But that wasn't really all that he was bringing to the table or even really probably the most important thing that he was bringing to the table.

In high school—it turns out—Nate had not only taught himself to code, but he put the code that he was writing to (shall we say) a highly profitable commercial use.

Ben: Finance?

David: No. He started writing AOL bots, programs, and communication stuff. First, he was selling them as shareware, and he stumbled into this nascent field—this is in the 90s—of email marketing and perhaps unregulated to parts of the email marketing industry where he operates as a consultant during high school and even through college. He ends up making—he would tell Brad Stone—almost $1 million.

Ben: When you say early unregulated email marketing, do you mean he was a spammer?

David: I mean he was a spammer. The CAN-SPAM Act was not passed until 2003, it turns out. At which point then, I think sophomore at Harvard, Nate closed his consultancy business for reasons that have never been discussed. Before that, he made about $1 million and put himself through Harvard and much more. It’s pretty amazing. In other words, not only is he a Harvard-trained computer scientist who knows how to code, develop, and can stand up internet products all on his own, he also knows how to market online. It is a pretty potent combination here.

They were smart to rope him back in. They jam in on these ideas. They’re thinking about the roommate thing, turns out roommates.com already exists. A couple of months go by, it's January 2008. They're out of other ideas. Joe and Brian decided, maybe we’ll dust off this AirBed and Breakfast thing, give it another go. They pitch it to Nate. They actually hadn’t pitched Nate until January on working with them on this. It was just this side project thing.

Ben: This was attempt number two at starting Airbnb?

David: Attempt number two, yeah. The idea is, South by Southwest is coming up in March, and people are starting to make their bookings going to Austin, and lots of people from San Francisco go to Austin still. Not this year, we were supposed to go do a live show there this year, but maybe next year. As anybody who's been to South By or Austin knows once when these festivals happen, whether it's Austin City Limits or South By, you can’t get a hotel room. It’s $1000, $2000 a night, it’s crazy.

Ben: In fact, I think the first time I went in 2010, I couldn’t get a hotel room and I booked an Airbnb.

David: I think every time I've gone, I've done an Airbnb. I've never stayed in a hotel for South By. Okay, great. This is where we’re going to launch. It's going to be big. They go on Craigslist. Who’s hosting rooms and who's in the looking section looking for rooms? They start pitching everybody on using airbedandbreakfast.com. They get a huge success. They get two actual bookings, one more than one for the festival.

Ben: 100% growth rate over their previous attempts.

David: Yeah, exactly. One of those bookings is Brian. They still only have one non-founder booking. Brian shows up. This is just amazing. We talked on the show about how the internet—back in the day—was like 12 people. It turns out in the mid-2000s, there were only 12 people. Brian shows up and he's hanging out there. He meets up—at Joe's suggestion—with another one of Joe's former roommates. It's just a guy named Michael Seibel.

Ben: No way.

Davi: Yeah. A guy named Michael Seibel, of course, of Justin.tv fame, which would become Twitch. He’s the CEO of Twitch and then would become and is currently the CEO of Y Combinator.

At the time, they were running Justin.tv. They’ve raised some money, they’re a known startup in the Valley, which we've covered on our Twitch episode. A similarly crazy story as here on Airbnb. Seibel says I can help you, Brian. He takes a liking to these guys and he knows Joe, these three roommates. I can help you find angel investors to make this thing for real.

Ben: I had no idea of Michael's involvement here.

David: Apparently never held any equity in the company. He was never an equity advisor or anything, just helped them out, and he did indeed help them out. Brian gets back. He's all pumped up. This hot startup and its founders are going to help us raise money. He shows back up and Nate's like, guys I've got some news. My girlfriend, from Harvard, Elizabeth—who’s now his wife. She was in med school in Boston at the time. She wants me to move back to Boston. Nothing's really happening with the site, so I’m moving back to Boston.

Ben: 50% of the people who are using it are the founders.

David: He moves back and once again, nothing really happens with the site for the next few months. Meanwhile, Seibel did make good on his introduction, and he and Justin Kan introduced Brian and Joe to a bunch of angels. They go into these meetings with angels and the angels are like, you’re doing what? How many people are using this? No, thank you.

Brian would write a blog post later about this, about all the rejections that they faced, of which there were many. They go back to Seibel and Justin Kan and they're like, if you can’t raise money, maybe you should just go do Y Combinator. We did it, it's great. PG’s great. It's still pretty early at this point in YC. Maybe you'll be able to raise money afterward.

Ben: It’s three or three-and-a-half years into it.

David: I think it was 2006.

Ben: Maybe Dropbox has happened. It was 2006, so it’s one or two years into it.

David: No, this was now 2008, but YC started in 2006, or was it 2005.

Ben: Something like that.

David: It’s all pretty early.

Ben: Dropbox and Reddit effectively have gone through, but there have been any other high flyers yet.

David: And Justin.tv. Nobody really knows outside of the Valley about them yet. They go check out YC and YC was actually—I think this was the first startup school that YC put on. An effort to evangelize and bring in more applicants as they move to the west coast. Brian and Joe go down to the Startup School. This is amazing, I think this is April 2008. This is where Bezos comes in, talks at Startup School, and uses (I think) for the first time the electricity metaphor for AWS.

Ben: I forgot Bezos spoke at Startup School. You get so wrapped up in the Jeff Bezos of the last 5-8 years that you forget how much more approachable he was, and a lot of these guys— Zuckerberg. They would all do the little startup speaker circuit because their companies weren’t that valuable yet.

David: Totally. Here is Bezos, who doesn't look like terminator Bezos. He's full-on still nerd Bezos mode. He’s pitching at YC for all of these rinky-dink startups because he's like I got to get people to use AWS. These little startups are going to use it.

Ben: Which ended up being genius.

David: Totally genius. Same deal as Stripe. Anyway, stories for another day. The other person who makes a big impression on Brian and Joe—speaking at the Startup School—is Sequoia partner Greg McAdoo, who is speaking there. There's a long history of Sequoia partners speaking at YC in Startup School. It turns out that Greg is speaking there because Sequoia had actually invested in Y Combinator. Greg was the person who led the investment for them and was on the board.

Ben: It wasn’t widely known yet.

David: It wasn't widely known yet. Brian and Joe, they're thinking YC is great. They're going to apply. The winter batch for YC was the next application, so they're going to gear up for that. In the meantime, they got to do something over the summer. They're like, what are the next events that are coming up? The presidential campaigns are happening. The conventions are happening, maybe we can use Airbnb at the convention. They do the same thing. I think the Democratic convention is in Denver. I forgot where the Republican one was.

They emailed local press outlets. They get some bookings. They actually get about 100 bookings that summer, which is great, but they're not making that much money. They're about out of money and this is when the famous serial story happens—the Obama O’s and Cap’n McCain’s.

Ben: David, I texted you, let's not go too much into this story because everybody already knows it. There's so much more to talk about in recent Airbnb history. As I went back and read the email exchange between Fred Wilson and Paul Graham, and then I read Fred Wilson's blog post talking about how they passed, I actually realized I had the story wrong. I didn't realize that the Airbnb guys made up Obama O's and Cap'n McCain's. I thought what they did was they went out and bought a bunch of them and then when the store ran out, they resold them. I didn't realize they took Cheerios and just made their own cereals.

David: Yeah. It's pretty crazy. I think that's the thing, everybody knows this happened, but the actual story was they didn't have any money. They're still trying to basically make their rent on the Rausch street apartment in SoMa. They had this middle-of-the-night crazy idea of let's go make some boxes, pour Cheerios into them, and sell them. It’s a limited edition.

Ben: It's a totally amazing, heads I win, tails you lose situation because you have food no matter what. It's like being in a casino. You don't care which side wins because you get food either way.

David: You get food either way. It's true.

Ben: The stakes are a little bit lower.

David: They end up making somewhere between $20,000 and $30,000 in profit from selling these things online, and that keeps them alive until they start Y Combinator. It’s cool. When you take a super far step back, you’re like, this is an amazing story of entrepreneurial grit. This has nothing to do with the business. This might be a theme that'll come back up as we progress through the story.

Ben: Yeah. It's only awesome because the company worked. I've been at companies that didn't work, and the only profit they ever made was from selling their furniture. It can kind of go either way.

David: It's an awesome entrepreneurial endeavor and a great show of scrappiness. It's a little bit of a double-edged sword.

Ben: It's also a great way to use their actual talents. As designers, they didn't have to outsource the creation of the art for the boxes, so therefore there was more margin available for them. I always think that a good lesson for entrepreneurs, in general, is what is the thing that you yourself can do and not pay yourself anything and you don't have to pay the labor. It's 100% profitable. For our business here at Acquired, we podcast. We don’t have to pay for any podcasters.

David: Talking to the internet? There is though the other reason I decided to include the Obama O’s and Cap’n McCain’s story is it’s actually what gets them into YC. Characteristically, Brian and Joe—as you can imagine as the story goes along here—missed the deadline to apply, and Seibel has to lobby PG and say these guys missed the deadline, but can you just give him an interview anyway? I vouch for them, they're good. Brian and Joe convince Nate to fly back from Boston, pretend that he's still part of the team to drive down the Mountain View, and have the YC interview.

He shows up. They're getting ready to drive down. The story goes—as they're leaving—Joe grabs a box of Obama O’s and a box of Cap'n McCain's to give to Paul Graham. Apparently, Nate is like, what are you doing? You look ridiculous. Cereal? Come on. They go, they do the interview, and PG doesn't get it. He's like, people actually are doing this? Staying on each other's couches? They're like, well yeah, people are doing it, but not that many people. It doesn't go super well.

After they leave the interview, Joe realizes he's forgotten to give Paul the cereal boxes. He runs back in and gives Paul the cereal boxes. This is how the story goes as chronicled in The Upstarts. He gives Paul the cereal boxes and Paul was like, what are these? Joe tells him the story of how they've stayed alive. Of course, what is one thing that PG values above all else? It's survivorship, grit, and default alive—being a cockroach as he would come to call them.

He says, wow, okay. You guys are going to stay default alive. I don't know about this whole thing, but you're in. They get into YC. They start in the winter 2009 batch. As Paul spends more time with them, he comes to really like these guys. Famously, he gives them advice. He says, where is stuff happening right now? We've got some bookings in New York. He says go to New York. He famously sends the—he starts calling them the Airbnb’s. During YC, they changed the name to Airbnb from AirBed and Breakfast.

They get to New York. They figure out that photos are important. They figure out that having a smooth payment experience is important because bringing a bunch of cash and giving it to your host is pretty awkward.

Ben: The very reason why people stopped taking cabs and used Uber instead because it was a cashless experience. I mean, one of the many reasons.

David: Exactly. Things start to work. Now meanwhile, McAdoo, remember, is Sequoia's liaison with YC and investor in YC. He's at YC one day and he's talking with PG. They're talking about this idea of grit, how being default alive and scraping through things—at Sequoia, they believe that's one of the most important characteristics of entrepreneurship as well. McAdoo asked PG, who in this batch is most like this? PG says that’s easy. That’s the Airbnbs over there.

Ben: Love it.

David: Love it. McAdoo goes over, he starts talking to them, and he’s smitten as well. This is kind of crazy. If you remember, back to this time—this is the beginning of 2009—the R.I.P. Good Times Sequoia memo 2008. The leaked memo had just happened a couple of months before. The world is falling apart. The Sequoia partnership and the rest of the Valley is thinking about triaging their own portfolios. The idea is you would give a bunch of money to some crazy kids who are building a platform for people to sleep on other people’s air beds and couches. It’s out there.

Ben: Yeah. It feels far removed from the reality at the moment.

David: Yup. To Greg’s internal credit though, he sees the potential, and he had looked at HomeAway, Vrbo, and the vacation rental space before. He’s like, no, I think these guys are doing something different. Of course, we’ll get into this a little bit more as we go. But a consequence of the financial crisis, R.I.P. Good Times, and everything that was going on in the world at this point in time was it was also a housing crisis. People were having a really hard time paying their rent, paying their mortgages, and getting kicked out of their houses. This was potentially a way for people to make some extra money and prevent that from happening.

Likewise, people still wanted to travel, didn’t have the same disposable income to do it, and this was a way to do it much cheaper. You could go to South by Southwest, or you could go to a conference in San Francisco for $80, $100 a night instead of being priced out of the market.

Ben: Yeah. It’s so interesting. The timing plays so much of a role in the success of these companies. There was so much innovation here and all the different ways that we’ll get into payments, reviews, trust, and all that that it could have succeeded in any time. But boy, did they have the wind at their back from the secular trends going on to make it a no brainer for a lot of people and really accelerate their ability to find product-market fit.

David: It was absolutely the right time. I think all these things are true, and CouchSurfing—as we talked about a little bit—definitely didn’t have the right model, definitely mess things up, but they also were launching and starting to build in the build-up to the financial crisis during the go-go years. Nobody was that interested in cheap travel.

Despite getting a lot of push back from the rest of the Sequoia partnership, McAdoo does end up convincing Sequoia to invest. Rather than doing it as a Series A, they say, I’m not sure about a lot of money here. I’m not sure about this being a full traditional investment. We need to conserve our cash and triage our portfolio. Let’s do a small seed check. They say we’ll lead a seed round. Sequoia will invest just under $600,000 in this company, $585,000. We’ll bring in some other folks.

Ben: Also, that’s nothing for Sequoia today. That’s still pretty much nothing for them at that time.

David: I think the fund that they’re investing in (I believe) was a $500 million fund. What’s that? 0.1% of the fund.

Ben: Yes. The funniest thing is that actually returned to that fund.

David: Oh, so many times over.

Ben: When you’re thinking like a venture capitalist and you’re like ah, I can’t possibly make a little bet. That’s just 0.1% of my fund. Because that can’t possibly contribute to returning the fund. I didn’t deploy enough of the fund’s capital to ever have a multiple big enough to get there. And here we are.

David: And here we are. They do $585,000, they bring in some angel investors alongside. The angel collective of Keith Rabois, Kevin Hartz, and Jawed Karim—one of the Youtube Founders. We talked with Kevin about this on the Eventbrite episode. They were angels in investing together. They get a small angel allocation of $30,000 between the three of them in the round. The valuation though, that’s the dollar size.

The structure though is a very much traditional venture round. The round is over 25% of the company. The post-money valuation on the round for the total round is $615,000, $2.4 million post-money valuation.

Ben: Whoa, no way.

David: Sequoia gets 24 and ⅜% in ownership in the company, and the angel collective of Keith, Jawed, and Kevin get 1 ¼% of the company for their $30,000.

Ben: That, I think, is the last big dilutive round the company would ever do. Is that right? Everything from here on out was shockingly dilution.

David: Yes. The Series A was $7.2 million out of $60 million or $70 million valuation. Roughly 10-ish% dilution.

Ben: And the percentage of the company sold, all they went down from there despite the fact that the dollars got very, very large.

David: That is accurate. Back to the seed round, they finally have a little bit of money.

Ben: 2.4 million posts. David, I can’t believe it.

David: Even back then, and it was a different era (like I said), it was a different situation.

Ben: That’s Sequoia Capital sure knows how to get their ownership.

David: They do, they do. They’re writing much larger checks these days to get that ownership. Even with this small amount of money though, remember Nate’s background. Nate basically goes to work, and this is his time to shine.

First, the thing that they do, which doesn’t require any money. People have probably heard about the Craigslist hacking. I didn’t realize the thing that I always thought that Airbnb did with Craigslist hacking was going to listings on the site and saying, why don’t you come to list these listings on Craigslist and email them, get around Craigslist email blocking and say, why don’t you come to list these properties on Airbnb.

The other thing that they did was actually the reverse, which was for people who were creating listings on Airbnb, they encouraged them to auto-published those listings back to Craigslist. You think, why would you want to do that? You’re taking your own supply and you’re encouraging your own supply[...]?

Ben: But if the transaction happens through them, that’s a way to go get more demand. And for a site without traffic yet.

David: Exactly. Probably both of these were key, but that second piece was especially key because yeah, how do you get the demand, how do you get traffic? You can go hand-to-hand combat, convince people to put listings on the site, but do you get them bookings? You put it on Craigslist, get the bookings through there, and you capture those bookings and you don’t let them go back to Craigslist. You say, hey, you did this thing, you had this great trip, why don’t you book your next trip with Airbnb?

Ben: Right. Craigslist captures very little of the value that they create. Effectively, what they did here is say there’s value created on Craigslist. We’re going to be the way to capture it.

David: That was Craigslist. And then the other thing they do, that Nate does—especially given his history that he knows well—is Google and Facebook Ads. These were the early days of Facebook Ads. We’re talking 2009. The platform existed, you could do it, and you could target by interest. What they do is when they want to grow demand, they run Google Adwords for places to stay in San Francisco, places to stay in Paris, places to stay in New York. Okay, that seems like a great way to get demand, but how do you get the supply that uses Facebook?

What they do is they go on Facebook, you can target by geography. Hey, we need some more supplies in New York. Okay. We’re going to target New York, and we’re going to run Facebook Ads. We’re going to target by interest. Brad talks about this in the book. We see this person likes wine—rent your place to a wine lover. This person is interested in yoga—rent your apartment while you’re gone to someone who loves yoga.

That’s how they would get supplies to sign up on the platform. And then, of course, the people that they would send, no guarantees that they like wine or yoga, but it worked pretty well. To be fair, these are some pretty great growth hacks. It wasn’t just that Airbnb growth hacked their way to success—as we talked about. There were a bunch of trends that were at their back here. The financial crisis, people needing to pay their rent, people want to travel cost-effectively.

We talked a little bit about the supply-constrained nature of hotels in markets when there are big spikes in demand. I think the other thing too that took a while for people to realize—but has probably become the most sustainable part of Airbnb in the ensuing 10+ years—is you don’t always want a hotel experience. Almost anybody who’s traveling, sometimes you want a hotel experience, but sometimes you actually want to stay in a place. Especially if you have a family or you’re traveling as a group. It’s such a much better and totally new and different experience to travel like this.

Ben: Yup. That’s a great point. Before we move on from the growth hacks too, I think it’s also important to identify that the door is closed on doing all of those tactics today. And not completely close, obviously, you can still use Facebook and Google Ads. But the value has largely been arbitraged the way where you can’t do it like a wide-open fire hose the way that they were doing it in a cost-effective way then.

The notion of new marketing channels—particularly new digital channels—is always who found the next hill? Go exploit it before all the value gets arbitraged away, then go look for the next hill. These are five generations ago of marketing tactics.

David: Yeah. Good luck doing those innovative Facebook things today. You’re going to pay through the nose for it. We’re now in 2010. Things are really starting to work. By midway through 2010, they have 700,000 nights booked on the platform. For something that seemed like a crazy idea, nobody would do—even the founders, we need to do permanent roommates, not temporary roommates. It’s totally taking off. They raised the $7.2 million Series A from Greylock.

Ben: Which by the way, why did Sequoia not pile on again? Isn’t that their strategy.

David: I think there were a bunch of questions about how big is this? What’s going on? There’s crazy stuff happening.

Ben: They also figured they own 24% of it.

David: They already own 24%, and they’re trying to stretch out the dollars in their fund. It’s not like we’re out of the financial crisis at this point. They go to Greylock, Reid Hoffman leads the Series A. I think this is actually true. We’ll talk about Airbnb’s business model in a minute, but things are going so well. They have more money in the bank than all of the Seed dollars that they raised when they raised the Series A. You’d never hear about this happening. They raised such a small amount of money, but then they did so well that they made more money.

Ben: Fame profitable company, Airbnb.

David: Indeed, indeed. By early 2011, the next year, they hit a million nights booked. This company has always been great at PR and publicity—probably the legacy of Brian and Joe. They had a million nights booked, it became big national news. This is when Fred Wilson publishes that blog post about how it was a huge mistake to pass on the company, and XPG had actually introduced them to Fred Wilson and wanted Fred to lead.

Ben: While they were in New York doing things like meeting the host, hiring photographers, and all that.

David: Yup. That summer—we talked about fundraising—they raised $112 million Series B from Andreessen Horowitz at over $1 billion valuation. This is summer 2011.

Ben: That’s a big Series B today.

David: We were talking yesterday on the DoorDash episode about their $40 million Series B in 2014 or 2015 being a huge Series B.

Ben: It is ludicrous to call this a Series B for that era.

David: Yeah. Ashton Kutcher comes into the round.

Ben: Ashton doesn’t actually quite come into the round. He comes in at a different time and gets (I think) preferential share price. Or maybe it’s just preferential share allocation because he has this value propped at the time that he’s talking with many companies about, which is I’m going to help you get publicity if you’re a consumer company. Often, he would actually come in after rounds, have them reopen it to let him in when the price should have gone up but keep the price the same. It’s a great strategy.

David: Leverage your value. They raised all this money. Why did they raise all this money? There’s actually a very specific reason they did, which was if folks remember back to this time, the Samwer brothers and Rocket Internet in Germany would talk all of this new wave of post web 2.0 tech businesses from Silicon Valley, clone them, and roll them out in Europe.

They did this with Airbnb with a company called Wimdu. This was existential because whether they realized it or not early on, unlike DoorDash food delivery, ride-sharing where it’s about winning each local market in hand-to-hand combat, Airbnb is a global network. You can’t fragment the market. There is going to be one winner globally because when people travel, they travel globally. Especially Europeans and North Americans travel back and forth between Europe and North America. You need to just have one platform. You can’t give up on Europe.

Ben: It’s such a great point. Whoever wins that the global market is also going to trickle down win local markets. It’s actually different from the airline industry, which also has a great cross geography network effect where you have these United and American Airlines. American is a big international player at this point—Oneworld Alliances. But you still have room for these regional players because the product that’s necessary for those regional jets, it’s a whole different set of infrastructure. That’s just not true with Airbnb. Whoever was going to capture this short-term rentals market in a global way was also going to win in a local way.

David: Yup. For a whole bunch of reasons, one of the reasons being just like you and me, Ben, over time the biggest way that they ended up getting hosts on the platform was people would use the platform as travelers. As guests, they would travel all over the world. They come back to their own city and say, I’d like to make some extra money on my place and then they would list it on Airbnb.

Ben: That whole strategy, that whole venture capital playbook that we talked about on the DoorDash episode of it’s truly a winner take all market, flood the money in, make sure you’re the winner—that was inarguably true for Airbnb.

David: Inarguably. They go fight hard against the Samwer brothers in Europe and they end up winning. It’s really interesting to think about why they end up winning. They do a couple of things. They acquire a few companies—smaller competitors in Europe. They open up a bunch of offices. What the Samwers are doing, they basically start a sweatshop in Berlin of young kids out of college and out of McKinsey into calling hosts and property managers getting listings to put on their platform. Airbnb starts doing the same thing.

The thing that’s interesting though is I don’t think that’s actually what made the difference. Because if you think back—and let’s talk about the product for a minute—the reviews on the platform that CouchSurfing had pioneered—initially, there are no reviews on Craigslist, but CouchSurfing had them. Reviews and trust are so important. You’re doing this crazy thing. You’re staying in a stranger’s house or you’re letting a stranger stay in your house, how are you going to trust that it’s actually going to be a good experience, that these aren’t crazy people. Crazy people aside, just that it’s actually going to be nice—reviews are super important.

When you’re doing something like creating a listings farm—whether this was Airbnb doing it or Wimdu doing it—you’re just going to end up with a lot of listings with no reviews and it’s going to be dead. There’s going to be no life happening. Airbnb—because they’d been operating globally from the get-go—had listings with reviews already in Europe. I think once you start to get that, then it’s really hard to compete with that.

Ben: It’s like a flywheel.

David: It’s a real flywheel going. They end up winning. Wimdu, I don’t know if it’s still around, but it never takes off. The other amazing thing—even though Airbnb went out and raised all this money—it turns out, they have a killer part of their business model and how the operations work. Which is when you go make a booking on Airbnb to go stay in a place, you’re usually planning your travel out at least weeks if not months in advance.

You, as the guest, pay that money when you go make that booking, but Airbnb doesn’t give that money to the host until after the check-in happens. You could have up to six-plus months in advance where Airbnb, they have the ultimate negative cash flow cycle. They’re getting the money in, they’re holding the money—roughly 12%, 15% of which is their fees, their revenue. They get that, they hold that upfront, plus the other rest of the booking fee that they’re going to give to the host—they hold that and then they give that out months later.

They raised all this venture capital, they probably didn’t even need it that much. Because as long as they’re growing, as long as the platform is growing, there is more money coming into the bank account.

Ben: Right. This negative cash conversion cycle—we talked about it a lot on the Pinduoduo episode, to understand that more at a deeper level. But you’re so right here. The most interesting thing to me is how, typically, in hotels, you would pay when you got to the front desk. This was a different enough category, a different enough mindset for people that they were willing to pay when they booked upfront. That felt like the right thing to do.

If Hilton was actually, we’re going to start charging when you start making a reservation, that wouldn’t fly. They couldn’t take advantage of this cashflow dynamic the way that Airbnb was able to by being different enough. On top of that, what you said about growth is really interesting. Because sure, you can take that cash as long as you’re growing and plow it into your growth because you know that more money is going to be there from the growth that you’ve achieved. This doesn’t work if you’re not growing. You can quickly get yourself into trouble with spending money you don’t have if you’re shrinking.

David: We’re definitely going to talk about that. This is all predicated on growth.

Ben: I keep talking about how crazy non-dilutive—all these rounds of financing were for Airbnb. This is one dynamic. Their growth actually financed the future growth of that company without needing the investor dollars to do it.

David: It’s so smart. This is actually like SaaS companies face the opposite of that where you’re selling deals. You might sell a deal for $1 million in ARR. It’s just going to be paid to you month after month.

Ben: Enjoy your $100,000 or $80,000 a month check.

David: Exactly. Things are working, they’re winning in Europe. January 2012, they had a cumulative 5 million nights booked on the platform. Six months later, in June 2012, they hit 10 million nights booked on the platform. This flywheel is starting to spin so fast.

Ben: There is your product-market fit right there.

David: Exactly. There are some bumps along the way. Definite stuff that’s been written about elsewhere that we don’t have time to cover here. The EJ incident when the woman’s apartment in San Francisco got trashed and they had to implement the insurance guarantee. That was terrible. They had accidents on the platform, there were crimes. There was stuff going on.

Not to mention the regulatory piece, which we’ll probably talk about at the end of the episode—New York and San Francisco in particular. Like, hey, you guys are running a hotel. This is not allowed. All that said, as difficult as those things were, the flywheel is spinning this company. Nothing is going to stop this growth.

In October 2013, they raised $200 million from Founders Fund at a $3 billion valuation.

Ben: They were selling 8% of the company?

David: Yeah, 7%, 8% for $200 million. Then the next year in 2014, they raised $500 million from TPG at a $10 billion valuation. Along the way, in between there—especially for the show, it’ll come back up in a minute—Greg McAdoo leaves Sequoia and Alfred Lin joins the board—Alfred Lin from Zappos and, of course, board member of DoorDash as we discussed yesterday. Pretty big week for Alfred.

Ben: Yeah. Crazy stat on Alfred. He’s been at Sequoia for 10 years, yesterday was his first portfolio company to IPO, and today is his second.

David: They’re both some pretty big IPOs, I would say. We’re now in 2014. We’ve just spent all this time enumerating all the amazing things about Airbnb’s business model, their growth model, their financing model, the product, why it’s defensible, why even the Samwer brothers can’t dethrone them. The thing though about when you have this beautiful capital business model and a global network effect, in contrast to a company like DoorDash, you don’t really have the existential requirement to fly low to the ground or operate at the lowest level of detail, shall we say. In fact, you can fly pretty high, you might say. You might be able to fly very high.

Ben: Yeah. This shows up in two ways. One, operationally, you can just be sloppier. You just can not need to be as finely tuned as say a performance marketing machine, and there are lots of different areas around the business where that shows up. But also, it means you don’t have to be as considerate about what you’re building and why because you have this flywheel that’s just spinning and profitable.

Sure, lots of people are showing up to the office every day, doing important work, and moving the company forward. But if they didn’t, other than maybe customer’s support and success, the business would probably still grow, it would probably still be profitable, and it would probably still be fine. At some point in their journey, they really did hit that where it was just going whether they touched it or not.

David: Look, this is the dream of a business is to have a business like this. Not only there is nothing wrong with that. That’s amazing. On the other hand though—that’s why it’s so interesting to contrast these two IPOs back to back with DoorDash and Airbnb. All those other things you said, Ben, are totally true too. Let’s go through it.

In 2014, the company moved into a new headquarters building at 888 Brannan Street in San Francisco. For anyone who’s ever seen it or if you haven’t seen it, look up pictures in this place, gold plated would be an understatement. There’s a five-story atrium in the lobby with a living wall that goes up the whole side of one of the sides of the atrium. It’s amazing. There’s a 24/7 kitchen. It’s no longer 24/7, but at the time, when they opened it, that operated. There are three meals a day, seven days a week.

Ben: All free for employees?

David: Yeah, all free. I can imagine that there was too much demand for breakfast on a Saturday, but who knows?

Ben: They wanted to create the environment that they thought would enable people to do their best work, to be creative, to create this culture that they wanted among hosts. I get it, but it is absolutely emblematic of the fact that the flywheel is spinning and it was spitting off cash.

David: They [...]. It’s now just become normal, but they unveiled the Bélo—the design mark of Airbnb.

Ben: I love that it has a name.

David: I know, the Bélo. Depending on your version of the Rorschach test, it may or may not look like some genitalia. Anyway, it’s now the Airbnb mark.

Ben: Yeah. I love the old Airbnb logo. I have [...] for sure.

David: I know. So good, the cursive script. Then, also in 2014, they started doing an annual conference for hosts called Airbnb Open. They had brought on in 2013 as Head of Hospitality, a guy named Chip Conley. Chip was the founder and proprietor of the Joie de Vivre hotel chain, which are these super high-end boutique hotels all around the world. Chip is an amazing guru-type guy.

At the conference—this is in the book—he’s quoted as saying that he’s predicting that Airbnb could win the Nobel Peace Prize within the decade.

Ben: Wow.

David: Okay, man. All right. Never heard of a startup winning a Nobel Peace Prize, but okay. Alfred’s going to resent us for this, but he has a great quote about all these in Upstarts to Brad. He says, “Well, growth covers a lot of sins, and the growth of this company was spectacular.”

Ben: David, I think you summed it up so well in saying this is exactly as an entrepreneur, as an investor, this is exactly the type of business you want to start that just goes on its own and that you don’t have to keep pushing the rock uphill. Once you have that, the lesson is, do not rest on your laurel. Stay analytical. You have to keep figuring out what’s next.

David: Or at least, don’t say you’re going to win the Nobel Peace Prize. Anyway, in 2015, Expedia bought HomeAway—the only really viable product-wise competitor out there in the market for just under $4 billion. You know, there are some headlines about, Expedia, HomeAway, they’re going to compete with Airbnb. No, this is surrender. This is basically admitting that there is no viable competitor out there.

In 2015, Airbnb made almost $1 billion in net revenue on $8 billion in bookings. 2015 is the first year in the S1 where we have this data.

Ben: By the way, $8 billion in bookings, that’s equivalent to the $8 billion that DoorDash did last year in their gross order volume. The amount of cash that moved through Airbnb in 2015 is equivalent to the cash that moved through DoorDash last year. Sort of interesting to think about these companies, mostly because Airbnb has a much higher price tag per order, much lower orders per year. But of course, thinking about the growth from when they both had that level of money flowing through the system after that is going to be interesting to think about too.

David: Indeed. In 2016, on top of that base, they grew 80%, and they do 14 billion in bookings, $1.65 billion in net revenue. They had raised in 2015 $1.5 billion in a $25 billion valuation. And then in 2016, they raised another $1.5 billion across two rounds. Again, not that they really need the cash, but probably a war chest.

Ben: They’re working on super favorable terms. They can think of lots of things to do with it. Investors are desperate to get shares of this company. I do want to take a quick comparison here and say, okay, the $8 billion and then they grew 80%. Last year, DoorDash had $8 billion in gross volume and then grew over 200% the next year.

David: We’ll keep talking about the growth rate as we go along here. I imagine, one of the things that they raised the money for, in 2015, 2016 was at the 2016 Airbnb Open the conference in Los Angeles, they have some big announcements. Ben and I went back and we watched this video on YouTube. It’s something.

Ben: It’s just a thank you for the internet. It is just miraculous that this thing is still on YouTube. Every single product they introduced—except for one—has been a complete failure.

David: It’s like you do have to admire the ambition of they wanted to add more products and had a big vision for Airbnb to be more than just what it was. All that is good. Though, at this conference they launched—Brian says, it’s the most significant development in Airbnb’s history. That the goal is to do for travel what Apple did to the iPhone with all the things that they’re going to launch that day. They launch Experiences, Places, of course, Homes–—their current Airbnb product, and a meta product above it all called Trips, that it’s all going to be a part of.

Experiences, people probably know, Experiences are still around today. Although nowhere in the S1 is it broken out the performance of Experiences or how many bookings they have of Experiences versus Stays.

Ben: The assumption that everyone’s making is Experiences are a phenomenally tiny percentage of the overall revenue.

David: Yup. Places was part of the Airbnb app. The idea was it was going to be like Meituan—a super app aggregator for all things you would want to do. It’s like Yelp, it’s OpenTable, it’s Meetup, everything you would want to do in your city where you live or a city where you’re visiting, all within the Airbnb experience. That was Places.

And then all of it lived all together in Trips. Within Trips, you have aggregated your Stays, your Experiences, and your Places, all the stuff you did. They didn’t launch but they talked about adding car rentals to Trips. They talked about adding grocery delivery to Trips. They talked about adding flights and maybe even an airline someday to Trips.

Ben: They even had a flight booking product in the works until March of this year.

David: Oh wow, I didn’t know that.

Ben: Yup. That was one of the canceled things with coronavirus.

David: Interesting. We’re moving at bad ideas, but I’m not sure they made a ton of sense within Airbnb. I think the disconnect is as looking back for me watching that video was I think Brian and the company really believed Airbnb—they talked about it so much in this conference—about belonging, about feeling home when you travel, and about the connections in the community between hosts and guests.

Undoubtedly, there are people that use Airbnb that love meeting strangers on the platform. I’m not sure that it’s most of the people who use Airbnb though.

Ben: I think there’s a recurring theme that seems to happen from this point forward in the business, which is Brian and management feeling very aspirational about why people want to use Airbnb, particularly around the community, particularly on belonging. People—again, generalizing—use it in a much more transactional way than that. They are logically weighing this option to stay here versus other options. I just think that that disconnect becomes more and more apparent over time.

David: Yeah. If you go back to what was one of the original—probably the biggest—why that made Airbnb work was the financial crisis. It was nice to stay in an apartment and whatnot, but I really want to go to San Francisco for $100 a night or $80 a night, not $1000 a night.

Ben: It is interesting around the 2014-ish timeframe, I remember my narrative of why I loved using Airbnb shifting. Where I used to tell people, it’s great, I can stay cheaper. And then I was like, actually, it’s not really cheaper anymore. But like, gosh, hotels are so sterile. Staying in an Airbnb—while it’s probably the same price, maybe more expensive, hard to tell—I can access neighborhoods I otherwise never would have been able to access.

I have a unique and cooler experience staying in this house. I remember this moment in time, it shifted from a price-based value proposition to an experience-based value proposition.

David: Yup. Same deal for me. What’s interesting is, actually, I didn’t go back and I should’ve. But anecdotally, for us, in our travel, there was a period of time—certainly when we were younger and more price-sensitive where all of our travel is in Airbnb. We won’t stay in any hotels.

And then during the period of time you’re talking about, it was like, when we would go for a weekend, it would depend on the trip whether we would do Airbnb or hotels. Sometimes, we’d go—Jenny and I were living in Seattle—we’d come down to the Bay Area. Maybe we go up to see our family, maybe we go up to Sonoma or Napa. Sometimes we’d stay in an Airbnb, sometimes we’d stay in a hotel. But then, as the prices started equalizing. We’re like, probably these Airbnbs aren’t that great.

Ben: Hotels are easy, hotels nice.

David: There are some really nice hotels. Maybe we’re just going to stay in a hotel.

Ben: Right. I think the thing that becomes true is people consider Airbnb one of their options.

David: Yup. Totally. Not that we stopped doing it at all. For group trips, getting the family together, going to a place where there isn’t great hotel inventory—a fantastic use case. But you fast forward to today, we’ve talked about Experiences, Places is gone, the Trips concept is gone. It’s now refocused much more on Stays.

The next year, in 2017, the company tells investors that they’re planning to IPO within 12 months. But then, at the beginning of 2018, they had hired back in 2015 a big name CFO, Laurence Tosi, who had been the CFO of Blackstone and the COO of Merrill Lynch before coming out to San Francisco and joining Airbnb.

He leaves the company. That puts the IPO in jeopardy. Brian publishes a blogpost when he leaves saying that Airbnb has an infinite time horizon and is focused on being a 22nd Century company.

Ben: That is some interesting shade.

David: Yeah. I’m not sure what it means to be a 22nd Century company, but it definitely means they’re not going public any time soon. Which I think was the message behind all that.

Ben: It sounds like Brian likely didn’t appreciate any of the push back or guidance he was getting around IPO readiness or whatever the opinions were of the CFO and other finance leaders who would come in afterward.

David: Yup, indeed. That starts off a whole cycle of speculation in the press internally, externally about when is Airbnb going public, will they go public, at what valuation, what is happening? Because, of course, they had raised all of this money from Sequoia and others, and it’s hard to have an infinite time horizon when you have investors with fund life cycles.

Ben: I texted David a month and a half ago. I was like, dude, I think Airbnb is going to IPO before the end of the year. And you’re like, okay. I’ll believe it when I see it. Heard this story before.

David: We’ve heard it before, but they actually do. We’ll get into the story of this happening and why it’s happening now. The reality that we’ve talked about—this 3x [...] so many of our stories. The first act here of Airbnb, this crazy thing, almost didn’t happen, but it was a great idea, gets into YC, grows and grows and grows. We’ve now gone through the second act of the growth is still happening, but some buzzling decisions are happening. But okay.

The thing is though, after all this starting in 2017, the growth no longer keeps going. Which we’ve alluded to in our own deed of use and usage of the platform here over the last couple of years. 2017, booking growth slows to 50% from over 70% the year before. Still really good. You’re at a huge base, going 50% year over year—that’s great. And totally IPO.

Ben: It’s a 10-year-old company too. A 10-year-old company growing at 70% on that base, nothing to be ashamed of at all.

David: Absolutely, you can go public with that. 2018, bookings growth slows to 40%. Okay, but still, old company, large base, and growing 40% annually—great.

Ben: If they had gone public after five years, we wouldn’t be naysaying this at all. We would be like, yeah, totally. They’ve been public for years. It makes sense that they’re into this 40-ish% growth rate per year.

David: Yup. The next year, in 2019, the last full year we have data before COVID. Bookings growth slows to less than 30%. I believe it was like 28 1/2%, 29% last year. At this point—to me at least—what’s most concerning is the growth is linear. They added $8.5 billion in bookings in 2018. That was two years ago growth. They also added $8.5 billion in bookings in 2019. The base is growing, but the amount that you’re adding every year is now constant. Of course, then we’ll get into what happens in 2020.

Ben: Indeed chuck that up to IPO readiness. They shifted their mentality from a grow at all cost company to we should start thinking about profitability.

David: I don’t think so because the costs keep growing—and this is maybe as if now more alarming—the company’s cost structure keeps growing as if it were a growth company. In 2019, total expenses grew 46% even though bookings grew 28%, 29%. Variable cost in 2019 grew 41% and fixed cost grew 60%. If anything as you grow—especially on this huge base—you should start getting way more leverage on your fixed cost, and they’re actually getting less here.

Ben: That’s concerning.

David: Concerning, indeed. Then 2020 happens. Before 2020 happens, in September of 2019, they announced that they will go public in 2020. This had been reported elsewhere, but the company now—by September 19—is close to 12 years old. The early employee options are going to start expiring.

Ben: Yes. How does that work?

David: I don’t know exactly. I don’t know if it mirrors—I think about like a venture capital fund life cycle. Usually, it’s a 10-year life cycle and then you have two 1-year extensions. I don’t know actually if employee option contracts mirror that. But also, at a minimum, think back to Sequoia, their fund that they invested in Airbnb must have been a 2006, 2007 vintage fund. You’re now over 10 years into that fund.

Ben: You’ve definitely got shareholders looking for liquidity on the investor side, but you also have these employees that have some form of expiring options or, at the very least, if you try and restructure that then there are tax implications.

David: Yup. And also, everybody would just like some liquidity, I will assume here, not to mention. They announced they’re going to go public and then COVID happens in March 2020. Overnight, the business evaporates. Not just evaporates, we talked about the huge benefit of Airbnb’s cash flow cycle when you’re growing. When you’re shrinking that really hits you.

This is crazy. In March and April of 2020, Airbnb’s gross booking values turned negative.

Ben: Is that because of refunds?

David: They are paying out more in refunds for future bookings than they were taking in in bookings. They actually had not even negative revenue. They have negative bookings. You’re actually paying people more than you are getting.

Ben: Brutal, which of course, it’s a global pandemic. Of course, it’s going to be brutal.

David: Totally, totally brutal. I didn’t quite realize this until digging into the S1, in March—as people probably know—Airbnb raised $2 billion in capital from Silver Lake and Sixth Street Partners in a combination of equity and debt. The debt piece, there were two pieces, two tranches at an 11 ½% history and a 9% interest rate. The equity piece was at an $18 billion valuation.

Ben: That was at a billion each, right? A billion of equity and a billion of debt-ish?

David: I think that’s right. I think -ish. I wondered at the time, these are pretty onerous terms on both sides. Massive haircut in valuation.

Ben: Obviously a 50% haircut in valuation.

David: And then the debt side, interest rates are zero out there. This is major distress debt. You’re pricing a tranche at 11 ½% percentage history. I think this is what was going on. Not only did the business evaporate, but they’re paying out refunds, and they must have desperately needed the cash at this point in time.

Ben: I am not, first and foremost, a finance person, but the bucket in my head that put this cash flow dynamic into is kind of a form of leverage. When you’re going well, it’s a way to basically make sure that (like we said earlier) you are able to use that cash to grow without raising new equity. The thing about leverage is it levers whatever direction you’re growing. When you start shrinking, you’re in big trouble quickly.

Very similar to another thing that was going on with Airbnb and with all tech companies is operating leverage. Airbnb has a really, really, really high set of fixed costs, but their variable costs are obviously much higher than a SaaS company because it’s a marketplace and they got to pay the host. But they make a lot of money in every transaction. The whole ball game for tech companies is to build the best freaking product you can—especially recently—and spend a ton of money on sales and marketing to go capture a winner takes most or all market. Your sales and marketing costs are high, your R&D costs are high, but those are relatively fixed.

David: Probably true R&D costs are.

Ben: Yes. And then, hopefully, your profit margins—on a unit basis—help you outrun all those fixed costs or high operating leverage. Now, when you’re shrinking or when your revenue is low, then that hurts you in the exact same way that it helps you as you’re growing. Because now you got all of these mouths to feed, but very few customers to feed them with.

David: Airbnb, of course, realizes this. In May of this year—shortly after the start of COVID and after raising this emergency capital—they have layoffs. They lay-off 25% of the company. That’s a significant reduction in force. They cut $800 million in marketing expenses. There you go—addressing each of those two points you just made, Ben.

Ben: Except that they didn’t actually let go a lot of the R&D. They kept mostly R&D people and laid off mostly the people in the customer success service organization.

David: Yeah. We might want to get into that in a sec. Brian describes it at the time as a “second founding” of Airbnb as a business. They jettison all of the other stuff that they were working on. Experiences are still around, and they moved to online Experiences. But no Places, no Trips. The company had started a movie studio at some point along the way there called Rausch Street Films. They had a lot of stuff going on. It’s all gone.

Ben: They had the magazine for a while.

David: Yup, all gone. The magazine. I don’t hate the magazine. The magazine makes sense to me. You’re a travel company. Airlines have magazines. That makes sense to me. You’re promoting travel. That’s marketing.

The business goes to zero—basically less than zero. But by Q3, things do start to recover. We’ve both traveled this summer for long-term stays.

Ben: A lot. I actually pulled together a great stat. There’s been basically two eras of the pandemic for Airbnb. There is the initial era, where everything froze up and they had to do this super onerous deal. But then there’s the second one, which is as we knew more about COVID-19 and understood how it spreads—it’s through the air rather than on surfaces, and all these things—people started making their own informed decisions around can I live my life safely?

It turns out, Airbnb was actually a great option to live your life safely more so than hotels. I remember a moment where Airbnb’s bookings were down something like 50%, but hotels were down 90%. I don’t exactly remember which month this is, but I think that narrative is definitely one that played out during the pandemic.

For me, personally, I have stayed in only one hotel since March. It was the only option, and it was in the middle of nowhere. I had to book the hotel, much to my chagrin, but I’ve stayed in six Airbnbs. That is illustrative of act two of the pandemic for this company.

David: Totally. We’ve been less active than you since Jenny’s more tied to San Francisco than you guys are.

Ben: More of those came from a bike trip, [...] to a different place every night.

David: But yeah, we’ve stayed in two Airbnbs and one hotel because we had to check out of Airbnb before we were ready to go home. The hotel was kind of a weird experience.

Ben: Who wants to walk through a lobby right now?

David: Yeah. I feel for hotels these days. The business starts to recover. We should say for all of 2020, so far, the first 9 months of 2020 versus the first 9 months of 2019, gross bookings are down 39% in aggregate. As makes sense because of the pandemic, growth has gone from slowing to literally shrinking. But things are recovering. In August of this year, month over month, August bookings were only down by 14% versus the year before. In September, they were down 17% versus 2019. But things are stabilizing.

Ben: It would seem reasonable to think that they will get to [...] either before a good chunk of the population is vaccinated or shortly after. They basically effectively lost a year of growth, except that they also shrunk.

David: I think that’s the question that we’ll talk about in a second in our analysis sections is what is going to be the growth rate going forward post-pandemic, post vaccines? That I think is the key question for this company. On November 16, 2020, Airbnb does file its S1 in a surprising move. They make good on their promise to go public in 2020, even though there’s a pandemic, even though the business gross bookings are down 39%. Unlike DoorDash yesterday where—what did we say? That for the first nine months, they’re up 300%.

Ben: Close to it.

David: For the year, Airbnb is down in growth by 39%. They filed their S1, and then last night, on December 9, 2020, they priced the IPO at $68 a share and upraising $3.5 billion at a $47 billion market cap.

Ben: Big, man. That Silver Lake investment at $18 billion just six, eight months ago looks like a genius move.

David: Indeed. What did we say? We said they priced at $68 a share. Got Yahoo Finance pulled up here. Who’s currently trading.

Ben: I see it in the Acquired Slack. People are buzzing about it.

David: You want the live reaction.

Ben: Oh my god. Opens up $146 a share at $159 a share now.

David: Yeah. Up over 100%.

Ben: I was expecting some kind of pop. Now they’re valued at over $100 billion?

David: Yeah. That would imply they’re valued at over $100 billion.

Ben: Wow. This company hovered at $30-ish billion for a while. And then the pandemic. I’m thinking to myself when they drop this in November, this company really had to go out this year because otherwise, why on earth would you go into this market right now? The market’s doing fine. The IPO window is open, but with their numbers, you would think, can’t you wait until things stabilize a little bit?

David: It’s funny. With DoorDash, you’re like, yeah, it makes sense why they’re going now. This is the biggest accelerant to the business in history. Wow. Wow, wow, wow. Okay, we’ll get into it.

Ben: Even with the 2019 growth rate—I put together some numbers to try and contextualize why David and I are talking about growth rates the way that we are. Uber, which I think is a reasonable comp because it’s also a marketplace business, and it was also at a global scale, it had also been a long time—10 years between founding an IPO in 2018. It was growing at 42% when they IPOed. That’s much faster than the 28%, 29%. We wouldn’t have called Uber’s growth linear at that point.

Lyft was filling themselves. They were doubling year over year at 100% growth.

David: That was common out of delayed Uber.

Ben: Yup. DoorDash obviously over 200%. Pinduoduo—who we covered to open this season—at 246% year over year. Again, trying to attack differently in every way.

When you gaze over into SaaS land, the numbers are also looking pretty good. Slack, which was a product-led growth company, primarily at that 0.81% year over year. Square was 55%. Shopify was actually more than doubling at 110%. The laggard of the bunch, which ended up not becoming a good stock, was Dropbox at 31%. Still a few percent faster than Airbnb pre-pandemic.

That’s contextualizing why we’re not super excited about Airbnb as a growth company, at this point.

David: I don’t have the numbers right at hand. But at first, Snowflake, which before this week had been the darling IPO of 2020.

Ben: It’s the new Zoom.

David: The new Zoom. They were growing at (I believe) close to a 200% growth rate going public. What is going on here? This company is shrinking.

Ben: This company has slowed growth and is now shrinking. I think an important thing to realize here too, the thing that scares me the most is, again, it’s a sword that cuts both ways. 91% of the traffic to Airbnb is direct, it’s organic. It’s stuff they’re not paying for. They’re loosely paying in brand ads, et cetera. But, again, that’s the dream, that’s what you want. But anytime that they’ve tried to lean really heavily into a performance marketing like DoorDash, they have not been able to do that well.

What I’m a little bit scared of is if they do want to turn on the growth engine and they do want to grow a lot faster than 30% year over year, are they going to be able to do that with precision and profitability? It’s not the muscle they’ve trained

David: You have to imagine, it’s not like they haven’t been trying. It’s not like that they don’t know that their growth rate was slowing.

Ben: Right. We do have some more nuggets here that we want to pull out from the S1 as we bring history and facts to a close. But I want to take this moment to thank Bamboo, the official sponsor of the analysis of season 7. As you know and have heard all season, Bamboo is one of the top growth marketing firms, and I actually have some breaking news.

I learned after releasing the DoorDash episode yesterday that DoorDash was actually a client of Bamboo in the early days of both of the companies. I was talking yesterday about how working with Bamboo would be a great way to get your performance marketing engine humming as nicely as DoorDash. I meant that figuratively. Since DoorDash is known for this performance marking competency. But it’s funny to learn that they actually did work together, and Bamboo played a small role in DoorDash’s story.

David: That’s awesome.

Ben: Just fun to get that anecdote. Bamboo has supported world class-growth companies besides DoorDash like AllTrails, Peloton, rover.com, and many more. And with paid search, paid social, creative production, attribution, and product analytics, Bamboo services always have the same objectives in mind. Helping tech companies earn growth marketing budgets back faster and retain customers longer.

Growth marketing budgets. A big topic for us the last couple of episodes. If you are a startup with multi-million-dollar growth targets or an already big and successful company looking to invest smarter, our friends at Bamboo will make a great extension to your growth team. You can click the link in the show notes or go to growwithbamboo.com to learn more.

All right, David. We talked about growth. I do want to round out history and facts here with a couple of IPO nuggets. The first is the cap table. At IPO, the founders owned 31% of the company, comparing that to the 13%, 14% that founders of DoorDash owned. Story of two different dilution methodologies over the years.

David: Story of two different degrees of capital intensity in your business.

Ben: Yeah, great point. Brian Chesky owned 11% going into the IPO. I was all prepared to talk about how he now has more than $4 billion to his name. I think now, this means he has ten plus billion dollars to his name on paper in Airbnb stock. Joe and Nate also both have 10%. I think they sold $100 million collectively going into the IPO, just to get a little bit of liquidity. I’m curious if there were other selling shareholders or if all of the investors held at the IPO, and if they’ll all be subject to the same lock-up. Do you know anything about the lock-up on this one, David?

David: I don’t. I’m sure it’s in the S1.

Ben: I assume it’s a standard six months. Sequoia, again, all my numbers here that I had prepared are just nonsensical now with this crazy leap in where the stock is trading. Sequoia would have made about $5 billion. I think now they’ve made somewhere between $11 billion and $12 billion, maybe closer to $13 billion.

David: Not bad for 0.1% of your fund you put into a company.

Ben: That’s crazy. I think in total, they put $260 million into the company for over 11 years. I assume that has to be over multiple funds.

David: Yeah, for sure.

Ben: Founders Fund invested across a couple of different funds. This information is from our The Information, and we’ll link to it in our sources. I think they came up with about $3 billion after investing about $150 million. It’s just like winners all around here. YC owned 2%, Greylock obviously one big, Andreessen Horowitz invested $60 million when they valued Airbnb at about $1 billion. I think they probably have made $3-ish billion coming out of this. Lots of winners in the venture world.

You also looked around, you mentioned Keith Rabois, Kevin Hart, Jawed Karim—personally, you’ve got Ron Conway, DST, Jeremy Stoppelman from Yelp was an investor, obviously, Bezos personally ended up investing.

David: This is like an Academy Awards speech.

Ben: It’s crazy. You got Jared Leto, you got Ashton Kutcher, and then by proxy Demi Moore. Lots and lots and lots of people are feeling very good today. In addition, of course, to the thousands of employees.

David: Absolutely. Any other nuggets, or should we move on to narratives?

Ben: Let's see. One thing to know before they IPOed is they had $2.7 billion of cash in the bank and then they had another $1.8 billion in marketable securities. They were going to double that cash because they were going to raise $2.4 billion. They ended up raising $3.5 billion. They now have a cash chest of $7 billion-ish.

The company will continue to be able to weather storms for a while, it looks like. I'm curious what they'll start reinvesting in now that they're through this period, and obviously have to show a really good quarter and next quarter after that in order to keep the investor excitement as high as where it is right now.

David: I'm just so confused. Maybe we should discuss the narratives.

Ben: Whatever could you be confused about? Let's go into narratives.

David: Great. Should we discuss the bold narrative first?

Ben: Yeah, let's do it. For folks who are new to the show, narratives are where we talk about what the media was saying when they had a bull case and a bear case for the company coming in. For me, the biggest bull case that I've heard is that they have the most unique supply of anyone in the industry that they spent a decade creating. They have this brand mote. They have 91% direct traffic that is largely a result of the fact that they did build that unique supply in a unique way to build their brand.

Now, it's just about harnessing all of these unfair advantages. That, to me, is the big story here of why they're in their own lane of competition. They're not really competing with the bookings of the world who all are fighting for the existing hotel supply. Although they're trying to bring on the Airbnb-type supply too, that's the biggest bull case.

David: I think maybe there are two other dimensions as well. I think that's probably the biggest piece, but one being that coronavirus and COVID has perhaps permanently changed some behaviors just like the part of the DoorDash ball case, perhaps, permanently changed more behaviors to be more favorable for Airbnb for travel. Not just in this period, but going forward. I think that might be a small part of this.

I think the second piece is—also, we've talked a little bit about TAM along the way—yesterday, with DoorDash, that was one of the big question marks for DoorDash is how big is the TAM? Do they have to get into adjacencies, et cetera? I think, for Airbnb, what’s always been true here is that there are no questions on TAM. Travel is big and although it has taken a big hit this year, it's going to come back.

Ben: Yeah. They cite a $3.4 trillion number on their TAM. I think the way they break that down is that $1.8 trillion of it is short-term stays, and then only $210 billion of it is long-term stays. The long term stay market—which is longer than 28-days stays—is actually smaller than the food delivery market, which I think is sort of an interesting comp. It tells you why they're not sprinting that aggressively toward long-term stays, but rather, they believe there's a $1.4 trillion opportunity for experiences, which explains why they're beating the experiences drum so hard.

Let's just focus on that $1.8 trillion markets of short-term stays. They got a lot of room to fully saturate that.

David: A lot of room to run there. I think that's the bull case. I think if you believe all of those things…

Ben: One more stat on the unique supply, great brand, direct traffic thing, the comp there is Expedia and Booking spend about $11 billion a year on Google ads, which I think makes them Google's top customers or a top handful of customers. Classically, the online travel agent market has been one where it's really difficult to acquire a customer and then keep them, rather than needing to go re-acquire them every single time they travel.

That's why this direct traffic thing is such a big deal. It’s 91% direct traffic to Airbnb is such a big deal because other players have not been able to acquire a customer once and keep them. Booking is trying, they're ramping down their Google spend in an effort to form a multi-transaction relationship with a customer. But Airbnb is really the one who's proven they can do that. I think that contextualizes why people are so excited.

David: Totally. That is a massive benefit to the company and opportunity.

Ben: Those two companies pay Google almost as much as Google pays Apple for all the iPhone search traffic. That's another way to contextualize that $11 billion number.

David: I would say should we feed the bear? I don’t know if there are any bears out there right now to make a bear case.

Ben: We should look at the short ratios and see.

David: Bear case, to me, the biggest piece of the bear case is what we spent the last part of history and facts talking about, which is that growth is slowing. Everything may be true about the product, the unique supply, and whatnot, but if you want to believe that you're going to access a very, very large chunk of that $1.8 trillion short-term stays TAM, you need to still be running fast-growing into that. What did they do? Last year, $38 billion in gross bookings Airbnb did? That's like a lot of billions, but that's not a lot compared to $1.8 trillion. And for the growth to be slowing significantly, then you wonder how much of this TAM are you really going to access?

Ben: Right, so what does that mean? Does that mean that their TAM isn't actually in the $1.8 trillion for the short-term stays and it's actually much smaller like the addressable part of that? Or is it that somehow, they're just failing to market to the vast majority of people who are living their life in this way and paying for things in this way?

David: Well, I think it's interesting. It's probably both. At least think about my use case scenario, it sounds like yours is the same use case with Airbnb over the last couple of years. In the early days—when it was just much cheaper than hotels—it was almost all of my travel. But then the prices went up and equalized more, and then it really became a question of do I want an Airbnb or do I want a hotel?

I certainly didn't want an Airbnb or a hotel 100% of the time. It was a mix. I don't necessarily see any path where prices are going to go down again on Airbnb and you're going to have that dislocation in the market. The arbitrage between Airbnb versus hotels as a traveler. I think it is going to get segmented out. Now, maybe back to the bull case, if you believe that post-coronavirus—just the preference for hotels is going to go down a lot—then maybe this is going to be a big accelerant to Airbnb.

Ben: Yeah, I think that's the right way to think about it. The bear case is going to keep going for me. There are potential market saturation thing and slowing growth. There is a growing belief that they will have recurring acquisition costs the same way that Booking and Expedia do because people are starting to multi-home more than ever. Vrbo is starting to see a lot of the formerly only Airbnb listings show up there. Booking is trying like hell to be able to have these sorts of unique experiences, the Airbnb-type of listing in addition to hotels on their platform.

Everyone is scathing toward a more homogeneous set of supply than has existed in the last 10 years. With that being the case, will that brand affinity keep up, will people start comparing their options, or in fact, be willing to book an Airbnb-like listing from Booking?

David: This maybe is a good case to talk about our own experiences as hosts too, because I think probably an argument against that and a big lock-in would be as a host if you say I'm not willing to do that. I get more value being on Airbnb. I'm not willing to multi-home, that would provide some lock-in. But I don't know how we are feeling, at least, as hosts.

Ben: I’ll tell you, I'm someone that, this year, has put my Airbnb also on Vrbo. It’s a huge pain to actually do that because Vrbo’s product is like—imagine taking Airbnb’s product and then just making it 30% to 50% worse in every way. That is the product experience of being a host on Vrbo, but once you have it up, it's up. Sure, you have to figure out how you're going to block nights on different calendars, but I was never someone to multi-home than I am now, and I know lots of other people who are the same way. It's an opportunity to maximize revenue, minimize vacancy, and there are ways to manage it.

David: For me, we haven’t multi-homed yet, but the only reason we haven’t is that we haven't listed our house really at all except for one week this year. But if we were—and we're traveling more—I think we absolutely would. The biggest reasons for me are—there's what you said but, I think it is also just the price aspect that I do think the pricing algorithms on Airbnb are biased to fill rates versus maximizing revenue.

Ben: 100%. I was going to save this for later in the show but I’ve got a diatribe ready about—and I don't need to fully go in it. But the incentives are misaligned between Airbnb in their host for features like smart pricing. I get smart pricing for Airbnb. Airbnb wants to maximize exactly what you're saying—nights booked and total revenue.

I, as a host, wouldn't want to take a $30 booking one night, but Airbnb would be like, great. There's higher liquidity. There’s more supply on the platform with more nights available. We got some revenue out of that transaction. But if you basically factored into a labor cost, there's a price at which the hosts are willing to take on the cost and risk associated with that. Airbnb’s smart pricing couldn't care less.

David: Exactly. The point I was going to make is that I care about the price. I want to maximize my revenue as a host. There are these other viable platforms out there. No, they're not as nice to use as Airbnb, Vrbo, HomeAway, and booking.com. On the other hand, they do have traffic. They do have guests. I mostly trust them. I have no reason not to trust them. I think they're viable. They’re not some fly-by-night competitor that’s going to send to crappy guests my way.

All markets are supply and demand, so if you want to maximize your price in anything—whether you’re raising around as a company, or you're a host of an apartment listing, then you want to maximize the amount of demand for your listing. It would be dumb not to be on multiple platforms.

Ben: Especially as Airbnb tries to be more scalable and more capital efficient. It's not as enjoyable to be a host on the platform as it once was, and it carries a risk to only single-list. If Airbnb decides something falls under this policy. Sorry, you can’t actually talk to anyone because we're trying to limit the number of people you can interact with. Unfortunately, because we perceive you violated this policy, your listing is banned. We’re blocking a week.

For people who are using this as their livelihood, imagine if you only listed on the app store and you did all this on Google play, and then Apple found something they didn't like about your app, and then you're up a creek. I think now that this market is maturing we're going to see more and more people not willing to take the single provider risk.

David: One thing that I think has changed over the past couple of years is there now are viable good third-party software tools to do this. Whether it's Beyond or Guestly, you can pretty frictionlessly—as a host—have your property listed across all of these platforms and not worry about keeping it in sync and having costs associated with that.

Ben: Yeah. I do think one credit we should give Airbnb, we need to caveat every time we’re negative with. I'm negative on this being currently valued at $100 billion. There are other things I'm negative about, but the sum total of innovation they've created is unbelievable. They're one of the few companies that actually did create an ecosystem around them.

There’s, obviously, the ecosystem that has yet to be proven with the professionally managed Airbnbs or the people that are [...] blocks of Airbnbs, that sort of thing. Something that's totally been proven as a successful smaller business is all these different software plays that can help you be a more effective host.

Now, is it a little silly that Airbnb hasn't done any of those themselves and relies on you to go find it on your own? Yeah, massively dropping the ball, but you got to credit them for enabling an innovation ecosystem. One more bear case.

David: I have one too, I don't know if it's going to be the same.

Ben: All right. Yesterday, on the DoorDash episode, we mentioned that with their stock pop, they’re seriously butting up against the edges of the total addressable market for takeout in the United States. In order to value them the way the market is currently valuing them, you have to believe they can expand into adjacencies and be the local real-time FedEx. For Airbnb, they have demonstrated a pattern of trying this many times over the years and failing. You have to value this company based on the market they’re actually in, not what they possibly could succeed at in the future.

As I think through this, I was trying to come up with one example where they've done something outside of their bread and butter. The thing they stumbled onto in the first real year of the company that they've done well. I don't think the company is a master executor outside of that initial opportunity. It's almost like the anti-Amazon, who's really effective at testing on new adjacencies to expand into and killing the ones that don't and then leaning hard into the ones that do. They tried luxury. They tried building a hotel. They tried experiences. They’ve tried dining. They tried booking air travel. They tried custom-designed tiny homes.

David: Were you on the Airbnb Plus listing? It’s a terrible experience.

Ben: Totally. But it became meaningless. It’s a bad experience and it got totally diluted. Much like Superhost, what does that even mean anymore? Nothing. It just feels to me the personality of the company is one where they're really proud of their ideas, and they want to make something their way. Their first idea worked really, really, really well, and I don't think any of these other ideas are being tested with rigor.

David: I was thinking about what you said. The only thing I can think of that was a non-original idea—there was also pretty early in the company's life that I think they executed incredibly well—was Instant Book. I think that was over a year into the company that they innovated on Instant Book.

Ben: 100% and they deserve all the credit for that. I think the innovations of Instant Book, payments through the platform, messaging through the platform, and their review system—together, they create the symphony that enabled this product to provide tons of value on both sides of the business.

David: Instant Book, that's part of the initial product. That's not a subsequent thing. I debated whether we talked about this in power, but I think it makes more sense a narrative maybe leading into power for a bear case on the company is—we talk about the bull case. You got to believe that they're going to keep penetrating a huge part of this huge TAM.

You probably also have to believe that these prices that coronavirus has shifted the winds in Airbnb’s favor. To a certain extent, I think it probably has. But I think it's also exposed a structural weakness for the company, which is if you think about zooming out—you mentioned Amazon like an analogy here—Airbnb is not Amazon. They are much more like eBay, and eBay has been on a similar path, enormous TAM, global network effect, torrid growth for many years, but then it slowed and has now—I don't know what their growth is, but they’re still a decent size company and whatnot.

Ben: We don't talk about them as part of the FANG.

David: We don't talk about them as part of the FANG. But what has happened?? It’s not like ecommerce, it’s not like peer-to-peer ecommerce has gone away. And in fact, it's continued to grow, but eBay's not captured that. What happened is, you've had specialized verticalized market places that have come in and taken away what eBay was doing, and then grown on those individual verticals. I'm thinking about companies like GOAT, I'm thinking about companies like Reverb in music.

There are a bunch of them out there. You name a niche interest of buying and selling something, there is a verticalized marketplace out there that either has or is in the process of offloading that market from eBay.

Now, with Airbnb, you're actually starting to see the same thing happen. How much this will happen and how deep Airbnb smoke goes and how big their core market I think is still a question. But Hipcamp is out there. Hipcamp is in the process of offloading camping-type experiences from Airbnb.

Ben: It's not hard to get to tiny green homes, detached ADUs, or anything from there. You can see how they start.

David: Outdoorsy out there is doing the same thing for RV’s. You can book an RV on Airbnb, or you can book an RV on Outdoorsy with dedicated feature specific stuff that people care about in a niche community. I think this is the big question. Let's assume coronavirus has changed people’s travel preferences. How much of that is going to stay on Airbnb, versus how much of that is going to go to some of these other new platforms or even the ones that are in their infancy or yet to be built?

Ben: That's a great point. You think about what Amazon did to create so much lock in there? They built all the services around purely selling your goods. Of course, they brought you the traffic, but then they also did fulfillment by Amazon. All the other third-party seller tools make it way harder to do that yourself. And they were able to aggregate so much consumer attention that way that anybody who only had a subset of that because they were doing some niche thing they were going to carve off, it was just never interesting enough as a seller because they couldn't get to the scale.

You think about all these things that Airbnb could do to make it a no-brainer to work exclusively with them, cleaning is a big one. There’s this thing that everybody has to go fend for themselves and figure out their own cleaner. Check-in is a great one. It’s these things that people rate you on that Airbnb, 13 years in, hasn't built host services for. You can imagine those things being game-changing for their lock-in and for guest satisfaction. Once you know that something is done the Airbnb way—in the same way, that this thing isn't sold by Amazon but it's on Prime, the same thing. I trust it. It's got the Amazon stamp of approval on it.

David: All right. Should we move into power?

Ben: Yeah let's do it. For folks who are new to the show the way the power works is it's a Hamilton Helmer framework. He’s the author of 7 Powers and a friend of the show. It is technically defined as the way to achieve persistent differential returns or put another way to become more profitable than their closest competitor and do that on a sustainable basis. I actually think—before we classify what types of power Airbnb has here, it's actually very interesting to think about this relative to the stock price. One thing that after reading 7 Powers always stuck with me was Hamilton makes the point that the markets are not short term focused.

Everybody who's accusing Wall Street of valuing a company based on last quarter's results, that's not all that they're doing. They're using that as a bellwether for the next 30 years of results. Sure, they may swing too far in one direction, but really the way that a market cap works is, of course, it's an extrinsically defined market for the equity in the company. Intrinsically, what it is it's a representation of what people believe the sum of all future positive cash flows in the businesses will be discounted to today.

As you think about power and market cap are intrinsically linked because whatever you believe the power that allows them to generate persistent profit margins, overall those future years are the way that you would calculate the market cap. If you're someone who's excited about Airbnb as a $100 billion market cap company today, to what power do you attribute that? Why do you believe that they are able to do that? David, with that preamble aside, I’m curious, what types of power do you think show up in Airbnb?

David: The totally obvious one—just like scale economies were the totally obvious one for DoorDash—for Airbnb is network economies. This is a two-sided network effect. It is global in nature. It is as powerful as I have ever seen in a business. I think, generally, you think about network effects, single-node network effects like a social network like an Instagram or Facebook—those tend to be the most powerful.

Dual-sided network effects where you've got one class and another class, buyers and sellers, hosts and guests like you would have in eBay Amazon, or here in Airbnb, tended to just generally be a little weaker because you're bifurcating the types of participants in the platform. This is amongst the most powerful of the dual-sided network effects I've ever seen because it’s global, it’s not local, and you really care.

The way you measure network effects is you ask each participant in the system how much do I actually care about the other nodes in the system being there? For Facebook or Instagram, it’s like, I really care that my friends are there. Having more people in there, I actually really care about that. That’s the whole point. For eBay, do I really care about the 16,000th seller of the latest iPhone? Maybe it drives the price down low, but I don’t care that much. For Airbnb, I care quite a bit because I really like having a variety of listings.

Ben: Another way to frame that is, for things like iMessage where I really only iMessage with like 10 or 15 people, as long as the 10 or 15 of us are on the same thing, it's okay. It's not that strong of a network effect because you don't need to interface with lots and lots of nodes in the system. Whereas with Airbnb, I don't care who owns the place that I'm staying at. I just want the most choice with the most interesting options such that there is sufficient density where I want to go in the price tier that I want when I get there.

That is a truly amazing network effect where—exactly to your point—every node that's out of the system has meaningful additional value rather than this concentration where my friends around me provide value, but everyone else that’s on the network provides me none.

David: That's actually a good point. I hadn’t thought about this, but this is probably why Instagram is—long run, even now—bigger and more valuable than Facebook. Because on Facebook, I care about my friends, my loose circles, maybe there are a thousand people on Facebook I care about.

On Instagram, there are brands and there are influencers. I don't care about the rondos on there, but I do care about the millions of people making interesting content. Okay, so I think that's a big one. I do think there's another one though, this power is weakening for Airbnb over time, but in the beginning, was big…

Ben: Can I guess it? Counter positioning?

David: Yes.

Ben: Yeah. That’s exactly what I had too. I was like, is counter positioning one? Well, less than it used to be. The cost structure for Airbnb to bring on supply was so much lower than it was for a Marriott to go and be the—I don't totally know how it works, but I know they don't know the real estate—operator of a hotel and brand it Marriott, take on the [...], and all that. I guess they don't take on the lease. They signed a contract to be the management company with the owner of that building.

David: That economic cost is in the system. Somebody’s paying the cost of the build-out and the lease.

Ben: Airbnb doesn't need to pay a dollar to bring that new house of supply on to their system. I mean, there are marketing expenses to bring that person onto the platform, but it's so much lower. They were wildly counter-positioned against the hotel chains because Airbnb could be way cheaper than them, and their cost structure just allowed them to without being in the red.

David: This was just market dislocation. But in the early days—when Airbnb’s were so much cheaper than hotels—part of it was market dislocation but I think part of it was this too. I could put up my house in San Francisco on the platform. I’ll make incremental money, my costs aren't that big. I’ll list it for $300 a night. Whereas, a hotel you’re like, I got to run this hotel.

Ben: I think the ones that they notably don't have are cornered resource or switching costs. For consumers, it's very easy to switch as long as there's another economy and this is related to cornered resources. You would think their hosts would be the cornered resource, but for a host, it's actually very easy to become un-cornered and go list on multiple of these systems. I think that's going to be a thing that we see increasingly more and more over time.

David: I think to some extent, the rating and review history is some lock-in there, not that much and less than it used to be. In the early days, when this was a new concept and people were like, I really need a lot of trust here to make this work. I think it was more powerful, but now, less than HomeAway, it’s fine.

Ben: Well, one thing that I want to do here—and it's not exactly power, but it's like a business model feature that I want to talk about—is the different types of market places and what take rates you can command with each one. I've heard it described where something like Uber is marketplace assign versus something like Airbnb is marketplace assist. Where in marketplace assign, because all of the supply is completely homogenous, it's effectively the same experience. You don't care as the demand, which one gets assigned to you. You just wanted to be close, and as long as it meets that criteria, great.

When that is the case, the business can command a higher take rate. They get to control more of the economics. For something like Airbnb, they assist me to browse, but I pick the specific house, and boom, I've booked it. In the mind of the consumer, the real merchant when I'm getting an Uber feels like it’s Uber. The merchant when you're on Airbnb feels like it's the host and Airbnb is just helping me with that transaction.

They obviously have fees on both sides. They charge guests more than the host, but they have fees on both sides. They're trying desperately to get more and more of the take rate, but ultimately they're never going to get to that 30+% plus that you see in ride-sharing where people feel like they're buying from the company when they're just facilitating you to buy from the provider.

David: I agree.

Ben: I don't have an opinion on whether that's good, bad, or anything, but I just think it's interesting—as we do have more of these marketplaces—to understand why they can each command different take rates.

David: Yeah.

Ben: All right. Let's move on to what would have happened otherwise because I don't think it's that interesting to guess what would happen otherwise if Airbnb didn’t IPO. I think we should run a counterfactual that compares Airbnb to Booking, which is a very different business.

David: What do we say, our number five acquisition of all time?

Ben: Yeah. I forgot they were even called Priceline at one point. Priceline buying Booking was just an unbelievable acquisition.

David: It was Booking in Amsterdam and what was the London company? They bought two companies, took the Booking name, but the other one was in London. I can't recall, anyway.

Ben: While these are two very different businesses—to oversimplify, Booking helps you find a hotel or flights, and Airbnb helps you find an Airbnb. I think even in the nomenclature there, you can see the difference where Booking didn't invent their supply. They didn't cultivate that supply. They went and forged the right types of deals in order to get them to list on their platform. But it’s actually very interesting just to look at a simplified income statement of both companies.

Let's look at 2019, before the effect of the pandemic. We’ve talked about Airbnb having $38 billion flow through their system from people staying in Airbnb’s, to hosts, to Airbnb, and to taxes over the course of the year. They took $5.3 billion of that in revenue. Any of the knocks that we’ve had on Airbnb so far, this is a $5 billion a year revenue company pre-pandemic. It’s a big freaking company.

The effective take rate on that is 13.9%. There are ways in which you should believe that’s higher. There are ways in which you should believe it is lower, but it's always interesting to me just to look at an annual income statement and take the revenue divided by the gross to come up with an effective take rate.

Their net income—when you go all the way to the bottom line—is that they lost $700 million. All that $5.3 billion in revenue, they couldn't generate any profit at the end of the day from that because they had to pay so much to headcount, sales, and marketing leases—everything that goes into running the fixed costs of the business.

David: Now, they were cash-flow positive in large part because of that cash flow dynamic we talked about earlier where they're getting the cash upfront then paying it out later.

Ben: Yup. I think it's something like the average person books 36 days or something like ahead of time. I think it’s shorter now in COVID. It’s something like 24 days, but they have on average a month of free cash flow there. You could think of it as net 30, effectively, on the payment.

Okay, so Booking, about two-and-a-half times bigger—$96 billion in gross travel bookings, $15 billion in total revenue, so about times bigger in revenue. That’s an effective take rate of 15.7%. They get to actually on a little bit more of that transaction than Airbnb does. This is where they're very different. Booking turns that into $5 billion of pure raw net income—profit that's owned by the business and its shareholders.

David: While also having to spend a lot more performance marketing than Airbnb.

Ben: Totally. They’re cutting $6 billion, $7 billion, $8 billion checks to Google every year and they're still able to generate $5 billion in net income. Very different businesses. I don't know for sure that this Booking number factors out flights. It may include flights there. Flights are kind of a silly thing to include because they don't really generate any real revenue on those. All the commissions are made on hotels.

Anyway, two very different businesses, one that lost to the better part of $1 billion and one that made $5 billion. The one that made $5 billion took 2.5x the scale to do that. It'll be very interesting to see with Airbnb—as they get to a Booking-type scale—are they also able to generate the profit that Booking does?

Ben: Well, I think that's what's so alarming about the past few years of financials for Airbnb. They're increasing their scale, even though their growth rate is slowing, but they're increasing their expenses faster than they're increasing their gross profit scale.

Ben: Yeah. All right, playbook?

David: Playbook, let’s do it.

Ben: Playbook is if you wanted to start Airbnb, what playbook would you run to do it? Of course, no one can do that because no one can teleport to 2008 and have a unique and original idea. But if you want to draw parallels and apply them in your business, what will the playbook be?

My very first one is unbelievable, never skip over the fact that they have created an incredible amount of value for hosts and for guests over the years. Create no-brainer value for everyone in the ecosystem and really good things are going to happen to you. Some people can only go on vacations that they otherwise couldn't afford. As a host, some people can make their rent or mortgage that they couldn't afford.

These are like big meaningful life-changing things that this company's existence enabled millions and millions of people to do around the world. There are people that can weather job losses, negative life events. I can't say enough about how much value they created and how much that makes people want to root for your company and put up with a lot over the years. Obviously, it comes with a lot of responsibility as people become dependent on you, but also to hold on to that for now and just leave it at creating value for people and amazing things happen.

David: 100%. The way I like to think about this—and I think this is the same idea—is can you expand the efficient frontier of a market? The efficient frontier is price and quality. If you think about a little graph of price and qualities, as price goes up on the Y axis, quality goes up on the X-axis. In any given market, there's an efficient frontier along with that of a curve. As I pay more money, I get more quality, and there's some curve to that. If you can do something that expands out that curve so that I get more quality for less money.

Ben: Right, for any given price, I get more quality all the way across the spectrum.

David: Exactly or even maybe it's only for a portion of that curve, but for some area of the graph, you have exceeded the current market. If you can do that in any market, you will be successful. Airbnb did this incredibly well across pretty much the whole graph.

Ben: It's like the economist's view of why this company is valuable.

David: Yeah, exactly.

Ben: The next big one I had was around creating unique supplies, but I think we've talked sufficiently about that one. One we haven't talked about is addressing Europe, 43% of nights are booked in Europe on Airbnb. This is not a US-centric company.

David: Paris is the biggest city. Historically, it always was.

Ben: Yeah. Only 29% of Bookings are in North America. Interestingly, revenues about even between the two, which means people are spending more money to stay in North American Airbnb’s than European ones. Until diving into this research, I don't think I would’ve guessed that 43% of bookings are done in Europe. I don't think there's a single other US-based company that we've covered on the show that you could say that about.

David: Yeah.

Ben: Maybe Booking, but they're not US-based.

David: I mean they’re technically US-based. Uber’s large in Europe, but I think probably larger in the US. Do you have more?

Ben: I do, yeah. Free cash flow is one. I don’t think I have anything new to say here. I think that's my last positive playbook one. This is kind of our bear and bull thing, but I do have some playbook items that are the playbook that they ran that don't necessarily have positive outcomes. But I'll turn it over to you first, in case you have others.

David: Well, I’d actually maybe expand a little bit on the free cash flow point. I think part of the reason that Airbnb has such amazing free cash flow dynamics is—whether intentional or not—they started this new market, new idea. When you do that, you have an opportunity to set the terms of how the market operates. They set the terms that you pay us upfront and then we pay out the hosts when you book. Now that's different from hotels. On booking.com and others, usually, you make the booking on booking.com but you don't pay until you check-in at the front desk.

Airbnb—just by virtue of being something new—they could set different terms, and they did and nobody then questioned it. I think it's interesting to note, whenever you're doing something like this, think through. I have the opportunity right now to set the terms.

Ben: Right. As long as I don't tell people I'm like an OTA, then they won't make me price like an OTA.

David: Yup. Go for it.

Ben: I'm racing around. It’s not a seed round. It’s a new form of investment.

David: On our LP show, Rahul talked about his fundraising philosophy and all that. He did that a lot of ways with interstitial rounds and some innovations. He's positioning the rounds that he's raising relative to the next rounds.

Ben: I have one, it's a mix of two here. It’s a little bit of a playbook that's been run that I think will ultimately have pretty negative outcomes for the company. All that direct traffic that they’ve been able to harness is a gift and a curse. We talked a lot about the gift. The curse is that they don't develop the performance marketing muscle. When you have always experimented and had a questionable return on direct marketing spend compared to your competitors who are laser-focused on it. I get worried especially when you combine that with the fact that their guest cohort retention drops like a rock after the first year and never really comes back anywhere close to the first year of spend.

It's a very leaky bucket funnel. There's a very reasonable rationale for this where most people go on one vacation a year. Unless Airbnb is getting 100% of your spending, you're not going to be able to do that. You look at DoorDash, which we covered yesterday where every cohort spends 50% more than the year before as time goes on. Net of churn, the revenue of that cohort goes up 50%.

Airbnb, in year two, drops to 30% something. Hopefully, they are able to get back up to 50%. But at least so far from the data we've seen, their cohorts do not get more valuable over time. It makes it so that you have a lot less of a cushion when you decide to deploy performance marketing dollars to grow when that's the case.

My next one is about reviews. They’ve gotten very far. We've extolled the system over and over again to build this trust-based network, but they still have a crazy amount of host consistency and quality issues. I think it's a thing that's holding the marketplace back. You have to hunt through a listing like crazy through several listings to find somewhere decent. You have to scroll deep into each listing to do it.

I don't actually look forward to browsing Airbnb to find somewhere to stay because it's becoming more and more of a chore. They've tried it with Plus, but Plus ended up being pretty meaningless just like Superhost, which I think is the Airbnb equivalent of winning the participation award. Yay, you're Superhost. You held two people that didn’t give you terrible reviews. Congratulations. I just think that the company relied heavily on reviews will save us for everything, but it hasn't been a silver bullet in making it easy and enjoyable.

David: Most reviews are meaningless. There are some that are helpful.

Ben: It hasn’t been the hammer that's solved every nail of giving you confidence when you're looking for a place to book, to book it. One thing that I wanted to call out that wasn't in the S1 that I think could be pretty damning—and I really would like to know the numbers—is host churn. They talk about revenue for the host. I really do think it's getting worse and worse to become a host over time as the company is subsidizing less and less things with investment dollars, is thinking less and less like a startup, is trying to be more profitable, and I think that that's going to be an issue for them, long-term too.

David: Yes, I'd be curious about that too.

Ben: That's it for my playbook.

David: Great. I think you covered all my [...] there too.

Ben: All right. Value creation and value capture. This section has two components. The first is literally the name of the section. Are they Craigslist at capturing the value in the world, or are they Google who does a very good job of capturing the value they create? Then lastly, how do you compare the value they created for the world to any value destruction that they've had? I don't think Airbnb is that interesting to discuss. Do they effectively capture the value they create? I think so. I think the more interesting ones to focus on here are negatives for the world versus positives for the world.

We spend a lot of time on the positives of the world. The thing that I think goes a little bit less discussed at Airbnb—and it comes in waves, sometimes it's a hot topic, sometimes it’s not and is dumped into the regulatory issue—is the impact on housing supply and housing prices. Because housing prices, especially at the low end of the curve, are extremely sensitive to small changes in supply.

I was digging into this. There's a good Harvard Business Review article that basically says, I think this is a quote, “This means that, in aggregate, the growth in home-sharing through Airbnb contributes to about one-fifth of the average annual increase in U.S. rents.” They actually found this to be a causal relationship. And they say that “because of Airbnb, absentee landlords are moving their properties out of the long-term rental and for-sale markets and enter into the short-term rental market.”

I have no ability to rule on this. I'm not here to arbit whether this is more value destructive than it is creative. I think there are lots of think tanks doing lots of work on that. But I will say this is a company whose brand potentially may have meaningfully outrun its net global impact in terms of netting the negative impacts against the positive impacts.

David: You're not putting in a betting market placement on the Nobel Peace Prize happening anytime soon?

Ben: I don't know how that's decided, so I shouldn’t bet on it. I think it's worth making the point that Uber is condemned as this massively evil company and yet created a way for millions of people to earn a living. Airbnb is extolled as a wonderful brand that had many hosts around the world ring a bell and create a nice video to open the IPO this morning. That's largely consistent with their brand, and yet there's a lot of potential value to it.

David: What this comes down to—and I don't know that they would have seen various parts of it—who's this playing on the platform? I think for people that own their homes, that live in the homes, that are renting them out—either renting them out while they live there to help with income, or renting them out while they're on vacation. It's hard to see much value destruction from that. They live there, they would live there anyway. This is helping them make money.

Where this gets really different and gray is property managers and people taking housing stock off the platform purely to become hotels, essentially.

Ben: Yup, well put.

David: The question is, what is the percentage of each of those use cases of supply on the platform? I don't know. I've seen estimates as high as over 50% is more the hotel use case removing housing stock, but this is one where everybody who's waving a datasheet has an opinion here and has a horse in a race.

Ben: Other than the Harvard Business Review article I found, there are two sources that have very detailed reports on this. One is Airbnb, and the other is an extremely liberal labor-focused funded think tank. You're like okay, who else...

David: New York City has fought on this for a long time against Airbnb. New York City has lots of housing commissioners and has lots of data on this since. I don’t know if I’d trust that either. The point is, there's no doubt that a large portion of the supply on the platform is property managers, and how much that is, I don't know.

Ben: Before we go into our grading section, we'd like to thank Perkins Coie, the official legal sponsor of season 7 of Acquired. I talked about this yesterday and I have our standard read in front of me. But I do want to continue to say here on our last couple of episodes, my personal experience with Perkins the company, any attorney that I've worked with there—particularly in the Seattle office—has just been exceptional. The work itself has been great. The service along with it has been awesome.

Real thought partners who don't just tell you, here's how people do it in the docks and that's what you should do, but like, here's why you might think about that. If you wanted to give on this, here's the thing that I think might be more important for you and not you. They truly council in every sense of the word. I just wanted to personally say, I've had a great experience. If you want amazing representation with all your bases covered, Perkins is a great, great choice.

Back to what I have here. They work internationally so folks should know. The Acquired audience is now 50% international, outside the US. Available to many of you and other geographies, much like Airbnb.

David: We’re building the Airbnb a podcast here, I love it.

Ben: That's right. They work with startups to the Fortune 50. They work on everything from corporate formation to IP to company financings. They even work on IPOs like this one. I'm not saying they worked on this one, but they work on IPOs. I think they would be an excellent partner. You should consider using them. To learn more, you can visit perkinscoie.com. If you want to hit us up at acquiredfm@gmail.com or drop either of us a note in Slack, we're happy to introduce you too. David, grading.

David: How do we decide we want to grade this one? Do we want to do the same as DoorDash yesterday for the use of capital along the way?

Ben: Collectively, how good of a use of capital was it for the company and the investors to go after this business opportunity in this way?

David: There's nothing to say here. This is the greatest use capital of all time. It's 100% A+. How could you not say that investing $585,000 in the seed, having this company build this product and thing with such amazing cash flow and business dynamics that are generating cash, and have that be worth whatever Sequoia is going to make today? Then all the other capital that went in along the way too.

Ben: What did they raise to date before Before the Silver Lake round?

David: Before the Silver Lake round, I believe it was around $2.5 to $3 billion that they have raised.

Ben: Comparable to DoorDash, but only a third of what Uber had raised.

David: Exactly. This is like the capitalist dream here.

Ben: Yeah. The question that I sort of have similar to my DoorDash one yesterday is, let's ignore current valuations and current share prices, and just think about that total $3 billion-ish that's gone in. Let's play it out long-term. Does the business (at some point) have enough power that it generates persistent differential returns? And is this business a cash-generating machine that in the long-term will return lots of cash to the business and its shareholders? I think so.

I have reasonable confidence that despite a lot of my reservations around slowing growth, around increasing competition, certainly around valuing this company at $100 billion right now. Unlike DoorDash who’s falling so close to the radar, I don't feel like the end state is sort of a boom or bust. I feel like there exists an end state that they can be a very profitable business even with a reasonable amount of competition in the market.

I think there exists a steady-state for this business where they don't need to spend as much on R&D, they don't need to spend as much on sales and marketing, and they're able to spit off cash for years and years and years. I'm not in A+ territory, but I am certainly in a territory when you think about it through that lens.

David: I like that a lot. To me, doing the research, thinking about this, and talking to people—it’s just so clear, this is eBay here. That's what this is. They have the same type of network effect, same dynamics, same cash flow dynamics—this is eBay. A capital [...] business. I agree. I think it's a good point to be an A, not an A+.

An A+ would be yes, and they’re already because let's be honest, there's no excuse that this company hasn't already been generating tons of cash. This company does not have the right size of structure right now. They're doing things like the film studio, Places, Experiences, the airline, and building units in people's backyards. It’s nuts. You strip out all that cost and this company—at an efficient operation—would already have been generating hundreds of millions of cash flow.

Ben: I will be very, very interested to see how that evolves with the changes that they've made to bring in more heavy hitters to their management team. They now have a CFO that has been out there for almost a couple of years. The CFO was the CFO of Amazon's worldwide consumer retail. They've really buffed up the management team with capital allocators. Depending on how they all work together, I think there's real potential here to lean out the business while still growing and realize the great profitable dynamics it could have. Man, what a season.

David: What a season.

Ben: Should we do some lightweight carveouts here on the way out the door?

David: Yeah, let's do it. This has been a great season, by the way.

Ben: Dude, it has.

David: We have some highlights.

Ben: Pinduoduo.

David: Epic Games.

Ben: SpaceX, was that in this one?

David: No, that was in the last season, I think. Epic though, our Epic episode was epic. The NBA. NBA was so much fun. I loved DoorDash yesterday.

Ben: That’s fun too. Unlike DoorDash’s, I will only have one carveout this time. It's much lighter weight. It's a Spotify playlist. I actually have no idea who made it, but it's Star Wars lo-fi hip-hop. It’s covers of all Star Wars music in a lo-fi hip-hop style. It was just phenomenal work and research music. We’ll put that in the show notes for anybody who wants to chill and jam can.

David: I can't wait for you to send me your links for your carveouts and sources so I can start listening to that one.

Ben: You got it.

David: My carveout, I mentioned earlier that we've been more tied to San Francisco because of Jenny’s job. People may know—I think I’ve said it on the show—my wife Jenny works for San Francisco Ballet here in San Francisco, which is one of the premier world-class best ballet companies in the whole world. It has been a very interesting year for the live performing arts when your business consists of packing auditoriums full of 3000-4000 people and having world-class artists perform in front of them while touching each other as part of the art form. That's been a roller coaster. SFB is doing great. Thankfully, they have wonderful donors, wonderful audiences.

What they did, The Nutcracker is the big part of the ballet season every year, and it's the holidays and Christmas. What they did is they've created a digital Nutcracker experience. It was actually written up in The New York Times. It's really cool. It's a recording of The Nutcracker. I've seen SFB’s Nutcracker dozens of times probably at this point, but it's a different experience to watch it online because the camera zooms in. It's a different experience, and they have a cool digital, virtual opera house tour, and experience around it. We’ll link to it in the show notes. If you need some virtual holiday tour, check it out. It's very cool.

Ben: That’s awesome. We’ll totally do that. For folks who don't know—as we start to wind down here—we have been codifying the playbook section from each episode in some written bullet points. We email those out now after posting each episode. If this is something you want, you can sign up to receive those playbooks at acquire.fm. If you join the Acquired Community Slack at acquired.fm/slack, you'll also automatically be signed up for those. It’s a great way to have something a little bit more shareable, tangible, and reference-able if you're thinking about applying any of those playbook themes.

As always, if you love Acquired and you want to hone your craft of company building, you should join the community of LPs. You'll get the LP show where we dive deeper into the fundamentals of company building and investing, in addition to our monthly LP calls where we talk with so many of you directly including Book Club. Actually the last three, we've talked to the author for each one. Hopefully, we'll have a fun one to announce early in the New Year as our next one. You can become an LP for seven days for a free trial. You can exit out at any time if you want. It's risk-free at acquired.fm/lp.

LP subscriptions make great gifts for the Acquired fan in your life. You can figure that out on your own. It’s a little tricky to kind of go through, so feel free to drop us a note at acquired.fm@gmail.com if you want instructions for how to gift the LP subscription.

On that note, we said this yesterday, we want to say it again. We feel very strongly that financial hardship should never keep anyone from being an LP. We want as diverse a group as possible, and people of every life stage and every life experience. Please shoot us a note acquired.fm@gmail.com and just introduce yourself. We're happy to help you out if finances are a constraint.

Lastly, if you weren’t subscribed and you like what you hear, you should. If you liked this episode and you have a friend that you want to send it to—perhaps an Airbnb host, a guest, fan of the company, or bear or bull...

David: Any type of farm animal.

Ben: You’ve been looking to get your parents into Airbnb or into Acquired. You're like, what episode can I send my parents that really would get them into it? This is a great one. The Oprah one was great for me to share with my grandma. This is another great one that I think a lot of people will understand. Consider this your opportunity to share the gift of Acquired this holiday season.

David: We have some holiday joy happening here.

Ben: No kidding, no kidding. Everyone, have a wonderful Christmas, Hanukkah, New Year’s—whatever it is that you celebrate—with or without family, or perhaps with folks on Zoom. We will see you next year.

David: Yeah. Although, we're going to have a little special. We have a special little holiday present for you coming next year. Not next year, next week.

Ben: Yeah, let’s not announce it. It’s outside the bounds of our official season here, but we're excited to get this one at the end of the year.

David: Some holiday fun.

Ben: On that note, thanks so much, everyone. We'll see you soon.

David: We’ll see you soon.

‍David: Hey, Acquired listeners. In the time between when we recorded this episode and now when we're releasing it, longtime Amazon board member and Madrona Venture Group founder, Tom Alberg, sadly passed away. We wanted to—instead of our usual funny, cold opener here—take a moment and dedicate this episode to Tom.

Ben: Tom had such a huge impact on David's and my careers. Tom also had such a huge impact on Seattle and really the whole technology ecosystem, helping to build the law firm, Perkins Coie, and the telecommunications firms, Western Wireless and McCaw Cellular, that really make up a large part of the infrastructure we all use for our phones today.

We also were lucky enough to have Tom on Acquired, and it was really wonderful getting to spend the time in person with him four or five years ago now, David?

David: Yeah. Tom was the longest-serving Amazon board member other than Jeff himself, I believe 23 years. He was the lead independent director and had a huge impact on the company and of course on us.

Ben: We'll all remember Tom. He gave back in so many wonderful ways. This episode is dedicated to you, Tom Alberg. Thank you.

Welcome to Season 11, Episode 2 of Acquired, the podcast about great technology companies and the stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert, and I am the co-founder and managing director of Seattle-based Pioneer Square Labs and our venture fund, PSL Ventures.

David: And I'm David Rosenthal, and I'm an angel investor based in San Francisco.

Ben: And we are your hosts. Our story today is probably the single most interesting business of the past 30 years. For the longest time, David and I resisted doing an Amazon episode because it almost felt like a trope or that we needed to do something maybe more unexpected.

We've tackled bits and pieces like our interview with former board member Tom Alberg in the Amazon IPO episode, the episode with Alfred Lin on Zappos, and of course, by referencing Bezos, his famous 2009 speech about outsourcing anything that does not make your beer taste better over and over and over again. But we decided that no self-respecting technology business historians like ourselves could skip over this incredible, tumultuous, death-defying, and ultimately very, very successful story.

Today, we'll be tackling amazon.com, the website that sells books and now everything else on the World Wide Web. As you know, Amazon is also one of the rare companies that built a completely separate and dominant business in Amazon Web Services. We'll save that for our next episode.

This story is for longtime students of Amazon and newcomers alike. While you may be familiar with Jeff's flywheel diagram, the famed door-desks, or the Barron's article from the dot-com bust headlined Amazon.bomb, I can tell you from staring at my mountain of notes that there are some details in here that I certainly didn't know and you may not have known either.

David: It's just such a good story, too. I'm so glad we did Walmart first. We almost didn't because it just perfectly sets the stage for Amazon.

Ben: Oh, yeah. The big thing that we're doing today is we're going to try and answer the question, how did Amazon succeed to such an incredible degree that it has where so many of its dot-com siblings burst into flames?

First, we have some big, big news here at Acquired world HQ. After seven years of beating back requests, we are finally launching a merch store. We've been holding on to this bit for a while because we can think of no better episode to launch our Internet storefront than here on the Amazon episode.

We're partnering with what I think is the single highest quality merchandise platform on the Internet, Cotton Bureau. They make really nice stuff that I have tons of in my closet. We're launching with men's and women's T-shirts, sweatshirts, tanks, and even onesies. If you like David, have a little one at home.

If you decide to be first in this first wave of people to sport the fashionable Acquired merch, you should tweet at us @acquiredfm, and we will retweet some of our favorites. The link is in the show notes, or you can go to acquired.fm/store.

For our presenting sponsor this episode, we have a company that we're very excited about, Fundrise. On the Walmart episode, they broke some news right here on Acquired about a fascinating new product called the Fundrise Innovation Fund. This enables their customers to not only invest in real estate on the platform, but also now private, late-stage growth tech companies.

This is obviously interesting because that's not an asset class that retail investors previously had access to. You had to wait until the IPO, and now they've democratized that and opened the asset class to lots and lots of people just like they funded Fundrise itself.

David: It is also great news for founders as well because retail capital is a great source of capital if you're a late-stage private company.

Ben: We're back here today with Ben Miller, the CEO and co-founder of Fundrise. Ben, can you share some more info for listeners on the Innovation Fund?

Miller: Thanks for having me, guys. It's no wonder you guys like our story because in building Fundrise, we unintentionally created an alternative to venture capital which everybody has a love-hate relationship with.

In 2012, we invented the idea of raising money for real estate on the Internet. Within a few years, we had 150 copycats, 150 different companies trying to do what we were doing with a billion dollars of venture funding.

Then, roll forward eight years to now, and all of those companies basically went out of business. What happened? Do we have a lot better strategy? Do we have better execution? I'm saying the main reason is that they were venture-funded, and we weren't. The venture funds ran their standard playbook and basically ran those companies out of business. We're a little provocative here.

We took a totally different path. We didn't think we wanted to raise traditional venture money. We spent many years trying to figure out how we could do something that's different.

One of our innovations is regulatory innovation. We worked with the SEC on a lot of new ideas. We figured out a way to raise money from the public but stay private. Since then, Fundrise has raised $155 million from the public but stayed as a private company, so we figured out a way to do it, and we did it at scale.

The Innovation is a hybrid of being public and private. It's more passive, more aligned, and lower cost because we don't have the 20% carried interest that we have to pay to venture funds.

Ben: Ben, what are the terms for investors on this fund?

Miller: Fundrise doesn't take a carried interest. It's just a 1.85% asset management fee per year, which is much less than the 2% and 20% of a typical venture fund. We basically became one of the biggest real estate investors in the world. We're today, by deployment, probably top 20 in the world. We wondered basically, okay, we're doing real estate, what's next? Could we do it for other private tech companies?

We went back to the SEC, spent a couple of years with them, figured out how to do it, and are launching the Fundrise Innovation Fund which is a registered fund that raises money from the public but invests in private tech companies. It's going to be available to all US investors. Anybody in the US can invest in it at $10 minimum. It's totally democratizing access. The hope is basically we get to disrupt venture capital the way we disrupted real estate private equity.

We're launching the Fundrise Innovation Fund at the bottom of the economic cycle. My experience is you can't disrupt the financial sector except in a downturn.

Ben: Fascinating.

Miller: It's a crossover fund, so we will own public and private tech. If you go public, we're not going to sell all your shares. We basically are a much more long-term investor because of the structure of the fund.

I think it's the future of venture capital. We're the first direct-to-consumer VC that allows the public to invest into private tech companies, but we won't be the last. This is a megatrend. I'm going to bet that within five years, the likes of Andreessen Horowitz and Sequoia will also launch funds just like this.

Ben: Fascinating. Listeners, if you are considering a growth round of capital and you're an entrepreneur thinking in the next year, I'm going to raise a round, you should definitely explore raising some of it with the Fundrise Innovation Fund. Just shoot an email to notvc@fundrise.com. If you're an individual looking for exposure to growth-stage tech companies, especially in this new climate we are in, you can go to fundrise.com/innovation. Our huge thanks to Fundrise.

After you finish this episode, go check out the LP Show by searching Acquired LP Show in the podcast player of your choice. Our next episode will be an interview with Austin Federa who many, many of you know from the Acquired Slack where he's been a member since 2016.

Austin is at the Solana Foundation, very deep in the world of Web3 and crypto. He gave us a great primer on the world of Web3 today, so check that out. If you want early access, it's already live for paid Acquired LPS at acquired.fm/lp.

All right, without any further ado, David, onto our story. Listeners, this show is not investment advice. David and I may have investments and certainly have investments in the companies we discussed this time. Do your own research. This is for entertainment purposes only.

David: Oh man, Amazon was not only my idea dinner pick at The Arena show but has been my favorite company, stock, and number one position in my portfolio for more than 10 years now, I think. It's an incredible company.

Ben: I had some conversation with you in maybe 2014 about how you basically owned Amazon stock by owning Seattle real estate, and you were doubly long Amazon with your very concentrated holdings in the company and owning your house in Seattle.

David: The only time I've ever sold any meaningful amount was to buy our first Seattle house because I needed the capital for the down payment. I figured I was essentially getting tracking stock on Amazon.

All right, we start in a very fun place today which is the end of the most recent Acquired episode on Walmart. I realized I could have sworn that we said this on the episode, but I went back and I read the transcript. We didn't.

You tweeted about it, but at the end of Made in America, in 1992, literally as he lays dying, Sam Walton writes at the end of the biography, "Could a Walmart-type story still occur in this day and age? Of course, somewhere out there right now, there’s someone with good enough ideas to go all the way, providing that someone wants it badly enough to do what it takes."

Ben: Such a good quote. He was writing that in 1992 while Jeff Bezos was ideating on what ideas could work on the Internet while working at D. E. Shaw. Oh my God, if he only knew.

David: It was like the prophets speaking. He was describing reality in history as it was happening, and he had no idea. Amazing. Speaking of books, we have a big thank you that we owe to Brad Stone and The Everything Store.

Brad is just the best. We've done episodes with Brad in the past. The Everything Store is the canonical history of the first 20 years of Amazon. We actually talked to Brad the other week when we were preparing for this.

Ben: We had to. It was both a question of, okay, with 10 years or whatever it's been of history, what else would you want to say that wasn't in The Everything Store, and also give us some context around it.

David: No doubt in my mind it is one of the best business books written of the last 20 years or of the 2000s for sure.

Ben: It's a thriller, yeah.

David: Brad actually said this when we were talking to him. He's like, there are two reasons to write a business book. One is that it's a thriller. The other is it's a how-to manual. The Everything Store is both of those.

All right, we jump from 1992 in Bentonville, Arkansas to Albuquerque, New Mexico on January 12th, 1964 where one Jeffery Preston Jorgensen is born. Many people listening—especially if you've read Brad's book—know this story, but it's pretty amazing.

When young Jeffrey's mother became pregnant, she was 16. His father, Ted Jorgensen, was 18. They went to the same high school in Albuquerque, and they were dating at the time. It turns out their fathers actually worked together. This is part of the story. There was a very specific reason why both of their families lived in Albuquerque, and that is because both of their fathers worked together at Sandia National Laboratories.

Ben: For folks who don't know, that laboratory was established, I think, because it played a huge part in the development of nuclear programs developed for the United States.

David: Los Alamos, New Mexico, which I think is an hour-and-a-half north of Albuquerque is where the Manhattan Project happened. That's where the atomic bomb was developed. Quite a while after World War II, the government split the US nuclear program into research—and that was Los Alamos and a bunch of other labs around the country—and then actual management of the weapons. There's nuclear research, nuclear energy, and nuclear weapons.

Sandia is the organization developed by the government—and it's actually a private operation now—that manages nuclear weapons. Both Jeff Bezos' biological grandfathers work there together, and Jeff's mom, Jackie, her dad was named Lawrence Preston Gise. He went by Pop Gise. He actually not only worked at Sandia. He was the head of Sandia. He ran the US nuclear weapons program. Before that, he was one of the original members of DARPA. It encourages the development of the ARPANET, the Internet, and the DARPA Challenge. Obviously, that was much after his time, but, man, you can't make this stuff up. That's crazy.

Their kids managed to get pregnant in high school. Ted and Jackie decide to get married before the baby's born, which they do. The marriage doesn't last though. It's not really set up for success here. When Jeff is about 18 months old, they end up getting divorced. Jackie, Jeff's mom, takes the baby and moves back in with her parents because she's still only 18 or 19 years old at this point.

Eventually, a couple of years later, when Jeff is four, Jackie remarries and moves in with her new husband who is a petroleum engineer for Exxon. Her new husband's name is Miguel Angel Bezos Pérez. Today, he goes by Mike Bezos, Jeff Bezos' adopted father. His story is incredible and actually touches our stories in a very small way.

Mike is from Cuba. He was a student at an elite private high school in Cuba when the revolution happened and Castro took over. His parents were able to get him out and send him to Miami.

Ben: Wasn't there some exfiltration program through the church for gifted youngsters?

David: Mike was part of this. He gets shipped to Miami, doesn't know anybody in America, and doesn't speak English. He ends up—from Miami—getting shipped to Wilmington, Delaware where he lives in a group home. He attends Salesianum High School.

That probably doesn't mean anything to you because you didn't do high school in Bloomington like I did. But I played sports against Sales growing up.

This is so awesome. He and Jackie last year just gave a $12 million donation to Salesianum which I think might be the largest single donation to a Catholic high school in America.

Ben: Wow, Mike and Jackie must have really made some smart investment decisions at some point in their life to be able to make that kind of investment.

David: We will get into it.

Ben: David, how does every single episode have some tie to Southeast Pennsylvania or Delaware?

David: I know.

Ben: I think we're picking favorites here.

David: We totally are. Mike is super smart. He quickly learns English. By the next year, when he graduates from Salesianum, he ends up getting a full scholarship to go to the University of Albuquerque to study engineering. While he's there, he pays his living expenses and is working his way through college by working at a local bank where he meets Jackie. They fall in love, they get married, and Mike adopts Jeff as his adopted son. They go on to have two more children. When Mike graduates, he gets the job with Exxon. He would end up working his whole career at Exxon.

Ben: And becoming a pretty senior executive, right?

David: Very senior executive, so he had some capital to invest a few years later which we will get into. They moved the family to Houston. (a) Mike's story is just amazing, (b) Bezos grew up. His dad worked for Exxon, Standard Oil. There's the connection.

Ben: Right, and grew up in Houston around the space program. We're not going to get into Blue Origin on this episode, but I think the last time we would have talked about Jeff's space routes would have been, I think, on the Virgin Galactic episode. We were talking about the development of the X Prize and SEDS, the college organization for students for the exploration and development of space, something like that. But basically, this college space club, Jeff was the head of that club, the president of the one, and maybe the founder of it at Princeton. There's this very clear throughline from spending time during his childhood in Houston through that and obviously Blue Origin.

David: I didn't think about that. Definitely, Pop Gise, his grandfather, has a big influence on Jeff—which we'll talk about in one sec—and introduces him to science fiction and space because he was involved in all that at DARPA, but I didn't think about that yet. Jeff grew up in Houston during the Apollo era. This was the heyday of NASA. Super cool.

Jeff goes to a Montessori Preschool in Houston, and he gets put into a new program for gifted young students in the Houston elementary school system. This is crazy. At the time, there was a woman named Julie Ray who was writing a book about this whole new concept of gifted streams in elementary school education. Houston is one of the leading school systems that's doing this.

She goes to the administration and she's like, hey, is there a student that I could shadow and see how gifted education is working? They're like, we have exactly the student for you, Jeffrey Bezos.

Ben: There are a number of ways we could highlight how special Jeff was even as a very, very young child, but this is a pretty darn good one. He was the student chosen for the person writing the book on this type of special program in the school selected for special gifted programs. He was one of one of one. He would go on to be valedictorian of many things in his life, but here's the first proxy for that.

David: It's super cool. There's a quote in the book. He has a pseudonym. He's "Tim" in the book.

Ben: To protect the identity of a child who can't yet pick if they want publicity, right?

David: Totally. He's in elementary school. There's this quote in there where Julie, the author, asks Tim's (Jeff's) teacher what grade level he's performing at. He must be in second or third grade at this point. The teacher says, I really can't say, except that there is probably no limit to what he can do given a little guidance.

Ben: Foreshadowing.

David: Right around the time when the family moves to Houston, Pop retires from Sandia, and he and Jeff's grandmother move back to a big ranch in West Texas. By big ranch, I mean a 24,000-acre ranch in West Texas that is 100 miles from the nearest retail outlet. Starting at this point—Jeff's four when this happens—Jeff spends every summer on the ranch living with his grandparents 100 miles from the nearest store, and he's just hanging out with his grandparents.

Ben: That's pretty formative, and in a number of ways. One of which is that his grandpa is remote, so you can't go by anything and you need to be unbelievably self-sufficient, but what an interesting playground for the mind being around his hyper-intelligent grandfather and having just nothing but time and space.

David: Brad writes about this in the book and Jeff talks about this, too. I think this is one of the most formative experiences of the person that becomes Jeff Bezos because for the months that he's there every summer, they have to do everything. They build their own tools. They perform their own veterinary work. There's a story about performing surgery on one of the bird dogs' tails. It's crazy. They're rebuilding farm equipment when it breaks.

Ben: We went 250 episodes without a bird dog and we're now coming up with two episodes in a row that mention bird dogs.

David: I know. Clearly, there's a connection here.

Ben: Yes, great retailers growing up around bird dogs.

David: But like you said, Ben, it's not like he's just doing manual labor out in the countryside. He's doing it with this guy who ran the nuclear weapons program for America.

Ben: Man, it's so hard to do a podcast about Amazon and Jeff Bezos now because the company and Jeff as a person are a symbol for so many different things to so many different people. Of course, I follow Jeff on Instagram and you see him in his cowboy boots with the Blue Origin rocket.

I remember when I first saw those before really understanding his past, I was like, that's disingenuous. Tech billionaire guy throws on his cowboy boots and heads to West Texas, and he's acting like I'm one of the locals, but that’s what he grew up doing on the farm.

David: Yeah. The ranch in Van Horn, Texas where the old Blue Origins operations are based. That's why it's in West Texas.

Ben: And there's a lot of space, a pretty good place to launch rockets.

David: There is literally space to launch. When Jeff's a teenager in high school, Exxon moves his dad to Florida, first to Pensacola and then to Miami. This is a cool little cap for this episode of Mike's story. He comes back to Miami all these years later as this big-time executive at Exxon, which I think was the largest company in America at that point in time. He literally steps off the plane in Miami and has nothing, and now he brings his family back to Miami with so much. It's so cool.

Jeff, as you said, graduates high school as valedictorian and like all great, talented high school graduates, goes on to Princeton. I'm biased, of course. A few of his fellow Princetonians while he's in college—

Ben: Is that really how you say it?

David: Yes, I'm a Princetonian, or a tiger if we're being less pretentious here. A couple of his fellow tigers, while Jeff is studying computer science at Princeton—Brooke Shields, Michelle Obama, and Jeff Wilkie—are also there at the same time. I don't think they were friends. Jeff was a couple of years behind, but they were there at the same time.

When Jeff graduates from college in 1986, he does not go into finance right away. He goes and works for a startup. He works for this company called Fitel which had been founded by a couple of Columbia computer science professors and was developing very, very early network technology for high-speed trading applications. I don't know if it was exactly like today. All this stuff is co-located in data centers with the NASDAQ and the New York Stock Exchange, but they're kind of a precursor to that.

He does that for two years. Then, in 1988, he's like, all right, I'm working for this startup, building infrastructure for this, and then a completely new discipline of finance of quantitative trading in finance, those guys are customers, are actually making a lot more money. Maybe I should go work for them.

Ben: But it is a great experience at that point in time. Being around early networked computing was pretty beneficial to give him not just the basic understanding of how it works but also what all the numbers mean. When I'm watching bits and bytes fly back and forth, I'm looking at packet counts, what hardware can support, what bandwidth, and what are the practical implications so that you can feel the types of applications you could build using infrastructure of the day.

David: The reason we're spending so much time on Jeff's early years and now, we're going to spend a lot of time on this chapter is totally like one of those Steve Jobs things. You can't connect the dots looking forward, but when you look back through Jeff's past—Joy Covey who we'll talk about actually has this quote that she gives to Brad Stone—it's a straight line from birth to Jeff Bezos today. It makes total sense.

Ben: It's really hard to cover Amazon as a business without it being a Jeff Bezos biography because in so many ways, Amazon isn't an extension of Jeff Bezos' brain. It really is a company made in his image. That's the case for a lot of these types of people.

If you look at Apple, that was very much the case for Steve Jobs. Also, by the way, an adopted son of immigrants. I've always just found that interesting. In some ways, I'm thinking, okay, cool. Let's get to the Amazon story. But even though it's called Amazon, at least for a very long time—call it its first decade—it really is just Jeff Bezos at scale.

David: Probably arguably for longer than that until recent times. In 1988, he leaves Fitel (the startup) and he goes to work actually in banking. I believe, almost surely, I don't know for sure, but I can't imagine he's not doing quantitative trading in finance. He's a technical guy. He's a computer science graduate. He had been working in this network operations for early stage quant finance. That's probably what he's doing.

He goes to the investment bank, Bankers Trust, which then through a series of mergers, as always happens on Wall Street, becomes part of Deutsche Bank. Deutsche Bank's going to come back up later in the episode. He's worked at startups and in computer science. He's got this entrepreneurial bug.

On the side, he becomes friends with a guy named Halsey Minor. Listeners, probably a bunch of bells going off. They almost start a startup together at this point in time. The idea was it was going to be a financial newsletter idea, but they become buddies. That doesn't work out, but Halsey, right around this time after that, goes on to start CNET.

Ben: It's crazy. The Internet was so freaking small then. Also, if you were to squint and describe CNET at a really high level, it's distributing the written word over this budding World Wide Web, which is what Amazon did. Ultimately, it distributed them through an abstraction layer where you print the words on paper first and then you ship the paper, but they would go on to start businesses riding the same wave.

David: Yup. I think they remain friends certainly for a while, if not still to this day.

Ben: Bezos does always chuckle at that where people would say, wait, you're starting this business that's meant to take advantage of this new piece of technology. The new piece of technology is particularly good at distributing hypertext over a globally available network. The way that you're doing that is specifically not by putting the text in the browser which can read the hypertext directly onto a screen. He does always chuckle about that.

But it is funny. To this day, you still can't really search for books. If you google search something, you're going to get websites. You're not going to get books. Despite Amazon, Google, and everyone trying, the book publishers have very physically DRMed these books such that you cannot search them in a very digitally native Internet way.

David: Yeah, it's funny even today. In 1990, Jeff gets a fateful call from a headhunter—Jeff's happy where he is, he was thinking about starting this startup—and convinces Jeff to go interview at a new financial firm that has been started just a couple of years earlier called D. E. Shaw. Jeff unexpectedly, completely falls in love in many ways at D. E. Shaw.

Some history on D. E. Shaw for folks that don't know—I didn't know a lot of this—the founder, David E. Shaw, was a Stanford computer science PhD from the '80s who then went on to become a computer science professor at Columbia University, I assume with some of the professors who went on to go found Fitel that Jeff originally worked for. He's a serious academic. He's actually back in academia now. He won the Gordon Bell Prize.

Ben: David Shaw is back in academia?

David: Yeah. Not at an institution, but he's a member of the National Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of Sciences. He's the real deal. His stepfather, when he was growing up, was a finance professor at UCLA, so he'd always been interested in finance but had studied computer science and was an academic.

In 1986, he left Columbia to join Morgan Stanley and then started D. E. Shaw in 1988. I think his model for this was Jim Simons who, in 1982, started Renaissance Technologies (RenTech). I bet actually a lot of people listening don't know. I just said that name and a lot of people are like, oh, what's that? What are these guys talking about?

Ben: It won't hit you as, oh, right, the firm that consistently produces the greatest returns of all time, but they're not taking any more capital, so you can't get your capital in.

David: Dude, RenTech and Simons are unreal. I'm pretty sure they are the best-performing investors of all time, full stop, period. We didn't do an episode on RenTech.

Ben: If we can get any information. The interesting thing about RenTech is that it's like a fortress.

David: Supposedly, the core Medallion Fund which is now all private capital of RenTech employees and Simon himself—there are no outside investors—averaged a 66.1% annual return from 1988–2018. Thirty years at 66% compounding. Nobody's ever beaten that.

Ben: We may need to go regrade our Berkshire Hathaway episode.

David: Yes, seriously. But that was the inspiration for D. E. Shaw. D. E. Shaw has not performed that well, but hedge funds today that people can actually invest in D. E. Shaw and a couple of others are the legacy of that.

Ben: Right. While this was the business model of D. E. Shaw being a quant hedge fund, they always resisted the idea that that's what defined them. They very much thought of themselves as this group of creative artisans who invest in businesses, started businesses, came up with new ideas, and viewed the world through different lenses. Sure, this is how they make money, but D. E. Shaw & Co. was so much more than that.

David: Totally. I think this is what Jeff falls in love with about the firm and David. Jeff joins, rises through the ranks super quickly, becomes the fourth Senior Vice-President at the firm—the highest level below David—and I assume, by far, the youngest. He's in his mid- to late-20s at this point. He is the future, the rising star at D. E. Shaw. He and David become super close.

Now, there are not a lot written about this, which you'll maybe see why in a second, but they were very close. I got to imagine that David saw himself as a mentor to Jeff. Jeff loves it there. He's involved in recruiting and bringing in all these super smart people of all disciplines into D. E. Shaw.

The MO was we just want to find the smartest people in the world. It doesn't matter if they know nothing about business and finance. It's like Bridgewater today. It is the inheritor of this. Just bring them in here and we'll figure out stuff for them to do.

A bunch of people who become really key early Amazon employees—Jeff Holden—I believe Bezos is involved in recruiting.

Ben: Who would later, of course, join Amazon right around two years after its founding.

David: Amazing how that happens.

Ben: Conspicuously close to two years exactly after Jeff left D. E. Shaw.

David: Yeah. Maybe there's a non-compete or something. Nicholas Lovejoy and another Princeton grad joined the firm, MacKenzie Scott Tuttle. That's what we were referring to of Jeff falling in love at D. E. Shaw in more ways than one. Jeff and MacKenzie would get married. I think technically, MacKenzie was the first Amazon employee.

Ben: Yes, it's interesting. I don't know technically in terms of literally, was she the first person to become a W-2 employee, but certainly, she was already doing work, particularly in accounting, working with legal, and setting up the operations of the business before Jeff hired Shel Kaphan who was the first engineer, the first full-time hire other than he and MacKenzie.

David: Yup. MacKenzie was definitely an employee doing work on the business. Within D. E. Shaw, like you said, they're this quant trading firm—that's how they make their money—but they view themselves as being entrepreneurial, starting these other businesses, and doing stuff.

David has Jeff working on a bunch of this stuff. The first project he leads is building out what they call the third market business. It was an idea to create a separate market from the exchanges where retail investors could trade without paying. At that time, you're paying a lot in commissions to your brokerage house. It's super cool.

Ben: By the way, this feels like it's probably the predecessor to dark pools. If they're making transactions off the exchange, then batch shipping them to exchanges to get lower fees, and that is the financial world that we live in today where lots of transactions happen off the exchange, then that's the predecessor to payment for order flow. They were the early days of all this stuff.

David: Robinhood, Citadel, and all that. They definitely were because at the same time, the Internet is so early. We're in early, mosaic Netscape days, 1992–1993. But David and Jeff, given their backgrounds, and David, having done his PhD at Stanford, know all these people that are starting the Internet.

Ben: And even Bezos himself. When he was (I think) in college, he had used the Internet when it was fully just command-prompt based and there was no GUI. It was just the very basic protocols, a Unix command terminal, and maybe Telnet was around at that point.

David: There was no World Wide Web. David and Jeff get really excited about this, and David reassigns Jeff as one of the most senior people in the firm. The two of them are going to work together to come up with business plans that they're going to start Internet opportunities within D. E. Shaw.

I think the first one that they do is an online retail brokerage for financial trading like E-Trade. It was a competitor to E-Trade. I don't know for sure, but I'm wondering if that may be the third market business that Jeff was working on that might have transformed into this because it makes so much more sense over the Internet.

Ben: Yeah, I totally agree. They also started Juno which became reasonably successful. I remember seeing commercials and getting CDs for it. That was early email.

David: Juno was one of the first free email services on the web. Then, they merged with NetZero and became an ISP and an email provider. It was started by Jeff and David within D. E. Shaw, both of these.

That's what they're doing during these years. I think Jeff's main job is the two of them would meet every week, they would brainstorm ideas, Jeff would then go off for the rest of the weekend to research the feasibility of the ideas, work on them with employees within D. E. Shaw, and then they'd launch them. They did this with a couple of businesses.

Ben: They were the only ones doing this. It's interesting how there were other people who observed the Internet. It was like, okay, cool. This is clearly the next technology wave. We had the PC. What do we do with this thing? Microsoft is one that comes to mind.

This is the Rich Barton story with Expedia. That was a division of Microsoft looking at the Internet potential businesses and saying, how do we start them?

Of course, I think longtime listeners will know that the way Expedia ended up happening is Rich basically said, hey, this online travel agency thing needs to happen. If we keep it in Microsoft too long, it's going to kill it. Let’s get it out brokering that deal.

D. E. Shaw, I think, was actually before Microsoft in realizing, okay, the Internet is going to be huge in a handful of years, but the thing that led to the dot-com mania was people realizing all at once that oh my God, the tidal wave is coming.

David: They were ahead of the pack, though. There were not many folks that were recognizing this at this point in time. They've done the online trading thing, the E-Trade competitor. That ended up getting acquired by Merrill Lynch. They did Juno, and they're brainstorming all these other ideas. One day, they come up with an idea that they both get pretty excited about. As Brad writes about in the book, the name for the idea is The Everything Store.

Ben: Which ends up being a pretty great name for a book.

David: The concept was, in one way, amazon.com, exactly. But there was also a pretty fundamental difference in the idea at this point in time. The idea was that you could use the Internet to build a whole new intermediary layer between consumers and manufacturers that would bypass traditional retailers. The discounters, Walmart, Kmart, Sears, and all that physical stuff, you're just going to cut them all out, and this beautiful Internet business is going to be just the algorithmic matchmaker between customers that want to buy stuff and manufacturers who make stuff. That's what Amazon is.

Ben: There's definitely this, well, the Internet is going to change so much that factories will just be able to sell to consumers online. It's rounding away all the messy middle that we talked about on our episode with Jeremy from Vitalik of you've got the manufacturers, you've got the product designers, you've got the distributors, you've got the brand, you've ultimately got retail, and maybe you can own two parts of that, but you're probably not going to own all of it. It was this very low-res picture of the way that the retail landscape worked.

David: This totally reeks of a 1999-era MBA business plan. It's like, I'm going to drop out of HBS. I've got this startup idea and a business plan. I'm going to get it funded. To their credit, they were a few years ahead of this and nobody knew at the time. Nobody actually knew how the Internet was going to play out.

This seemed maybe plausible. If it would work, it would be beautiful. You wouldn't have to actually do anything. You just sit in the middle and take a tax on transactions. The idea was that the manufacturers would dropship orders directly to customers.

Ben: Right out of their factory, which is totally a core competency.

David: Yeah, totally. That's going to work.

Ben: But importantly, while Jeff is still at D. E. Shaw and regularly doing this ideating, he starts to dive really deep into what categories could make sense for this as a starting place.

David: Yes, the two of them are both very excited about this as they should be.

Ben: Commerce, a pretty big market, huh?

David: Yeah, it turns out. Retail in America, other than US real estate, may be the biggest market in the world?

Ben: Yeah. Auto, I think, and maybe food.

David: Like you said, Ben, they quickly realize, okay, if we're going to do this. You can't just start with The Everything Store. You need to pick one category, build that, build the consumer brand, the website, and the traffic, and then you can add categories over time on top of that.

Jeff goes off during his weekly research activities. In his researches, he decides that books are the ideal category for a few reasons. One, they are perfect commodities. A paperback copy of book X is a paperback copy of book X. It doesn't matter where you bought it and how you bought it. To the customer experience, it's basically the same thing.

Two, there are only two major actual distributors of physical books in America. There are many publishers, but distributors who actually have the inventory of the books are Ingram and Baker & Taylor.

Ben: Do you know where Ingram is located?

David: Oregon, right?

Ben: Yup, Roseburg, Oregon, a convenient one-day drive or less half-day drive from Seattle.

David: Although Jeff was not thinking about that at the time.

Ben: No, not yet. That'd be the next step.

David: It's actually pretty easy to enter this market because all you need to do is establish accounts with Ingram and Baker & Taylor, and then you get the vast majority of the market for commercial books. You have access to the inventory.

Ben: Yup. There are a few other things, too. Books are great because when you compare them with music, there are six different record labels that you'd have to get each of them on board. They can't consider music because obviously, shipping books and shipping CDs is a pretty comparable experience from a weight perspective, packing perspective, and all that. To the extent that it's going to be shipping to people, you have to just look at the industry dynamics of each of those because just like books, CDs are perfect copies, perfect commodities.

David: On many dimensions, they're better than books—lighter weight to ship, standardized packaging, et cetera.

Ben: Yes. But with books—unlike where music that we talked about in our Taylor Swift episode, there are six labels—there are 4200 book publishers. While you can very quickly get the whole catalog of the two distributors, if you end up actually negotiating with publishers, there are a lot of individual publishers. All these small publishers actually do matter because there are 3 million different books that are active and in print worldwide, and the long tail matters. It's not just that everyone wants to listen to Taylor Swift in books. There are lots of rare or out-of-print books that people totally want.

David: The genres, and there are niches.

Ben: The status quo is going to Barnes & Noble, special ordering something, and paying a bunch of extra money for that so it can arrive in a month.

David: I think David and Jeff considered music and CDs as well. I suspect this is probably the reason they decided to go with books. Actually, Brad quotes Jeff in The Everything Store, "With that huge diversity of products—3 million books in print—you could build a store online that simply could not exist in any other way. You could build a true superstore with exhaustive selection and customer value selection."

Borders and Barnes & Noble say they're book superstores, but I think they only stocked 80,000 or so titles, which is a lot, but it's not 3 million.

Ben: It's not the infinite shelf space of the Internet. Also worth noting, Barnes & Noble and Borders each only had less than 12% of the retail market each, so it's not like there was somebody who already had 80% market share that you had to go fight. You ostensibly could reasonably quickly become Barnes & Noble or Borders scale.

David, you said something important there which is that only with the Internet could you really build this true superstore. Bezos keys on this very quickly in the very first interview that he gave which we'll link to in the sources. It was actually at a conference in Seattle. Someone just interviewed him right outside the conference. I think people have probably seen this video or screenshots of this video. It's worth watching the whole few minutes because it's unbelievably prescient.

He basically points out that if you can do something in the old paradigm, you should. When there's a new paradigm like the Internet, you basically want to find things that you could not do any other way in order to really exploit the power of the new paradigm.

David: Oh, that's such a great playbook theme that we can highlight here. I'm thinking about Web3. It's so obvious. You can build stuff in Web3 that you can do in Web2. That's fine, but really, you want to find the stuff that you can't do otherwise.

Ben: Right. Don't create the banner ad, slap it on the Internet, and be like, see, it's like a magazine but on the Internet. Invent the feed format.

David: Totally. That's so good. I hadn't seen that interview. That's awesome.

Jeff, like we've been saying, just keeps getting more and more excited about this the more he digs in. He and a couple of other employees at D. E. Shaw start researching competition because there were other online bookstores at this point in time. There was books.com, and a few local physical bookstores around the country had started up ecommerce Internet storefronts. You could buy a book from XYZ local bookshop around the country and have them ship it to you.

They started experimenting with the competition and they realized that nobody got the whole catalog, so to speak, the infinite selection. It's still all in this old-school physical paradigm like, yeah, we'll put up an ecommerce storefront and we'll put up a website, but we're just selling our inventory out of what we got in the back here.

Ben: And importantly, it was basically all static. The notion of a web server was a very new thing. There were HTML pages and you could put those up on a server so that somebody using a browser could hit it and get that static page back, but this notion of code executes when you hit a URL to dynamically generate a page really wasn't happening yet, so all you can ever do is fetch the static sites. It just relied on whatever bookstore put up that page to make sure it was updated with what's actually in the store.

David: Yeah. Jeff is like, this is a big idea. There is a window to go do this right now. Somebody's going to figure this out.

Ben: Do you know the stat on Internet growth?

David: Yes. He gets it wrong, right?

Ben: I think the stat is that as Jeff looked at two different research reports and basically approximated the middle, what he was analyzing was basically the amount of traffic.

David: Yup. The number of web packets sent over the year of 1993.

Ben: It grew 2300% in that single year.

David: No, this is the error that Brad writes about in the book. It grew 2300X from January 1st, 1993 to January 1st, 1994.

Ben: Wait, he was off by 100X?

David: Yes, which is 230,000%.

Ben: What? Somehow, I missed that.

David: Yeah. He would later quote in speeches that he read this report, and he saw the traffic was growing by 2300%. It jolted him out of his complacency and realized this idea is huge. I got to go do this on my own.

Ben: Holy crap. I was going to make the point of if you see anything growing 2300%, you should start a business on top of it, but I didn't realize that I was with the outdated stat.

David: There's a minimum threshold at which you should stop doing whatever you're doing if you see something like this, and go do that. That threshold is below 2300%, but if you see something that's growing 230,000% in one year, you really got to quit your job and go do this.

Ben: It is crazy. Being in a venture, we looked for, oh, what's the next technology wave? What's the next paradigm? Is it Web3? Is it some form of VR or AR?

David: You and I have never seen this in our professional lifetimes.

Ben: We have never witnessed this, no.

David: We have never seen anything within an order of magnitude of this.

Ben: Mobile didn't happen this quickly. There was no single year in mobile that was nearly as fast as the rapidity of Internet adoption. A lot of us in venture and in startup land right now are starting businesses and investing in businesses that are innovating around the edges and innovating on stuff that's pretty mature. There's nothing that is the fish in a barrel opportunity of suddenly, everyone appeared over there using garbage tools and all we have to do is make a pretty good tool, and everyone's already on the thing.

David: I think we should just pause the episode right now and highlight that everything comes from this. All we are doing now is capitalizing on the ripple effects or the aftershocks of this giant earthquake of which we will probably never see another one in our lifetimes. The Internet is it. It's all the Internet. This is the beginning. Everything now is still just derivative of the Internet.

Ben: The idea that suddenly, everyone is networked together and can obtain any information very quickly. There wasn't even really an interaction model yet. It was just about obtaining information. There were GET requests, but there weren't POST requests.

I don't know if that's technically true, but one reasonable way to think about it is you could load any web page, but there weren't a whole lot of forums you could type things into to send information back to those companies or those servers.

David: In Jeff's head and lived experience, this is all happening at once. He's been working on this Internet stuff and there's this new idea that they're working on that he's probably more excited about than any of the other ideas. He reads these reports, the ultimate of his complacency. He's like, dang, I've got this really cushy job here at D. E. Shaw, but I might need to leave this and go do this on my own.

What happens next is open for debate. Jeff wrestles with this decision for a little bit. He and MacKenzie just got married. They love their life, they love D. E. Shaw, and they love living in New York. Jeff really is the heir apparent to take over D. E. Shaw.

Actually, like I'd said, just a few years later in 2001, David retires, goes back to computer science research, and leaves the firm in the hands of other people. It's very reasonable that could have been Jeff if he hadn't left.

Ben: Absolutely.

David: Jeff calls up his parents. He calls up Mike and Jackie. He's like, what should I do? They're like, oh, you should stay at D. E. Shaw.

Ben: Of course. It's very successful, you get a great salary, and you're well thought of in your industry.

David: How many 28-year-old or 30-year-olds have the success and opportunity that you do? Not many. They suggest thinking about what to do.

Later, he comes up with this framework for making the decision that he calls the regret minimization framework. It really is such a beautiful way to think about big life decisions like this. I've used it. It's really great.

Ben: Absolutely. Me too.

David: The framework, for people who don't know, is when I'm 80 years old, I'm looking back on my life, and I look back at this fork in the road here, which path am I going to regret the least? What will cause the least amount of regret when I am 80, I'm looking back, and I'm like, oh, I made that decision. Do I regret it more or less than what the alternative would have been?

When you look at it that way, the answer is just brain-dead obvious. When he's 80 looking back and he's like, well, I could have built Amazon, but I stayed at D. E. Shaw, that's going to be some serious regret.

Ben: He's just an entrepreneur. It ultimately wasn't really a choice because he wasn't going to take over this thing and be a manager of someone else's vision. That's wholly on Bezos.

David: Which is funny too. I've actually been coming to think that I've used the regret minimization framework to make decisions. I was thinking about this while preparing for the episode. I would have made all those decisions anyway. It was just a justification. People are going to do what is in their blood to do, I think. You're so right, this was in his blood. He was going to do this.

He goes to tell David that he's going to leave. He's going to build The Everything Store on his own.

Ben: Yeah, not only am I going to leave to be an entrepreneur to capitalize on the Internet. I'm going to do the exact thing that we've been the most excited about that I've been working on on your dime.

David: Yes. This is where the legend is. David's like, let's go for a walk. They go off from the skyscraper office in Midtown Manhattan, go for a walk through Central Park for two or three hours, and talk through it all.

David supposedly says to Jeff, look, you got a future here. I very much want you to stay and build this within D. E. Shaw. I will compensate you appropriately. It will be worth your time. But I also understand the entrepreneurial impulse. I left Morgan Stanley to start D. E. Shaw. I get it. I've been in your shoes. If you leave and do this on your own, I'll regret it, but you have my blessing.

That's the legend of how it went. Whether that actually is what happened, I genuinely don't know, but it's a very nice legend. Let's put it that way.

Ben: You're suggesting that it could be a little bit more adversarial or that there could be a little bit of ill will of, hey, I thought you were working on this under the umbrella of D. E. Shaw.

David: Jeff goes to raise money for Amazon.

Ben: He doesn't raise it from David.

David: Right. That would be an obvious source of capital.

Ben: And it's not like Jeff magically had a check waiting for him. Jeff ended up taking the better part of a year to raise a measly $1 million over 60 meetings ultimately from 22 different investors to sell 20% of the company in order to raise that first $1 million. If it was an option for him to call David and shortcut that, you would think he would have.

David: At the end of the day, none of this matters because I am 100% convinced. There is no doubt in my mind nor do I think should there be in anybody's that had Jeff stayed at D. E. Shaw, there would be no Amazon. Regardless of it being worth Jeff's time or compensation, this is the beauty of venture capital and the American entrepreneurial system. Usually, building things that are great is hard, and usually, when things are hard, if you are just an employee making a salary and somebody else owns the company—

Ben: You don't have the level of maniacal progress that Amazon did in its early days.

David: Certainly did. We're going to talk about it. The idea was completely flawed. The business plan was worthless because lots of people had that business plan, and it was completely unrealistic.

Ben: It is interesting thinking about who the Internet appealed to at this moment. It appealed to Jeff or it was on Jeff's radar because Jeff is a nerd. He has a CS background. He was really into Star Trek. He loved obscure novels. He loved storytelling. The Internet appealed to technical librarians at this point in history. That's probably the best way to describe the cult following that bootstrapped the original network of the Internet. It was academics and people who loved libraries and programming.

David: It was also the legacy of the counterculture movement which had died down and morphed into this out in California.

Ben: For sure. This is the thing that put it on Jeff's radar. It's also the thing that really defined who would be willing to join Jeff on this crazy adventure. It wasn't that he was going in recruiting right away the very best and brightest out of the top institutions with the shiniest resumes and who could really do anything. It was people whose hearts burned for I want to make it easier for the world to consume knowledge. I want to make it easier to find rare out-of-print books. That was the seed of the original culture of the people who were attracted to Amazon both as customers and employees.

David: Which was not D. E. Shaw. I think this is also another reason why Jeff really struggled with it because he loved D. E. Shaw. He met his wife there. He loved those people. Eventually, that DNA would come into Amazon, but yeah, let's talk about Shel Kaphan and the first non-MacKenzie employee of Amazon.

Ben: To move the story along, he decides he's doing this. He decides, okay, I need to incorporate the company. He picks a few candidate cities that he could operate the business in because Manhattan is not a wonderful place to be running a bootstrapped startup at the time.

David: By this point in time, I think he had finally figured out that shoot, I might actually have to take delivery of some of these books, and shipping them back out to customers in midtown Manhattan is not a great place for that.

Ben: Right. He starts narrowing it down. There are three cities on the list. Seattle is obviously one of them as a candidate city in part because of its proximity to Roseburg, Oregon. I believe the second candidate city was Boulder. Anyway, they ended up deciding on Seattle. Of course, part of it is that proximity reason. The other part is related to the tax environment of Washington State. As folks know, there is no state income tax in Washington State much like in Florida or Texas.

David: But you would think, given Jeff's history, Florida or Texas would make more sense.

Ben: Right. But there's another big one, too.

David: There are two more big ones.

Ben: One of them is access to technical talent. Microsoft was just absolutely in its heyday. Jeff respected what Bill Gates and crew had built and thought, you know what, opening up a business right next to Microsoft, if I'm going to be attracting programmers, seems like a good idea. What's the fourth?

David: The fourth, you have to rewind a little bit to the recruiting of Shel. Shel, Jeff got introduced to actually through a D. E. Shaw colleague. Shel was an engineer-programmer who lived in Santa Cruz, California and has worked for a bunch of early Silicon Valley startups including Stewart Brand and the Whole Earth Catalog.

Ben: Yeah, absolutely.

David: At the Whole Earth Truck Store in Menlo Park.

Ben: Which is a rare books retailer, right?

David: It was counterculture. It was curiosities that Stewart thought were cool and would be in the Whole Earth Catalog, and then they sold them out of the back of a truck in Menlo Park.

Ben: It's perfect. For listeners who are like Whole Earth Catalog and Stewart Brand, what are you talking about? There's one other element of tech history which will quickly jolt you out of your seat and go, oh, that's what we're talking about here. Steve Jobs who is widely attributed to the "Stay Hungry, Stay Foolish," when he originally invoked that, was citing Stewart Brand. It was printed on the inside cover of the Whole Earth Catalog.

David: It was at the last issue. When they stopped publishing, the iconic photo of the Earth as seen from outer space and then said "Stay Hungry, Stay Foolish" was a total inspiration for Steve Jobs.

Shel was working there.

Ben: Which is so cool, because then, Stewart gets woven into the Amazon story in this way, of course. But then Bezos also has reverence for the Whole Earth Catalog and gets to spend time with Stewart Brand and a bunch of those folks down the line, too.

David: Yup. They work on The Clock of the Long Now, the 10,000-year clock.

Ben: Which was an investment from Bezos Expeditions. I think it was one of the earliest projects that he backed when he became individually wealthy.

David: How did Jeff become individually wealthy? It wasn't necessarily from selling his Amazon shares. We'll get to that. You are not going to believe it when we tell that story.

Ben: How Jeff Bezos became a billionaire, and it had nothing to do with amazon.com

David: That would be the clickbait if we were a YouTube-native podcast. That would be the title of the episode.

Ben: In fact, maybe we'll clip this into a segment and put it on the Acquired Stories Channel.

David: Maybe do a photo shoot of us in a crazy pose. Like oh my God, no title card.

Ben: YouTubers, man. All right, Jeff gets introduced to Shel.

David: Shel is part of this deep legacy of everything—Silicon Valley, startups, and what becomes of the Internet. I believe the original intention was Jeff and MacKenzie were going to move out to Santa Cruz and were going to build Amazon in Silicon Valley. Why wouldn't you? Maybe it's a little farther to Oregon than Ingram's but not that much farther. It's fine.

I didn't realize how recent this had happened at the same time. In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled on a decision that retail companies do not have to collect sales tax in states where they don't have a physical presence or operations. It doesn't mean that customers don't have to pay sales tax when they buy items from a retailer that is not physically located in their state.

Ben: It means that the burden is on the customer instead of the retailer which, of course, every individual is going out and saying, what purchases did I make last year that I should be paying sales tax on that may not have been charged to me?

David: Oh my God, it's like crypto taxes.

Ben: Yeah. People will pay taxes if it's easy. They won't if it's hard.

David: Jeff finds out and reads about this. He's like, oh, no, we cannot base this company in California. Not New York, not Texas, probably not Florida. What is the Venn diagram of close to a book distributor, has access to technical talent, and enough technical people I can hire but not so much that I'm cutting out a huge swath of my market? Seattle is the obvious choice.

Ben: Which you wouldn't pick today because of this self-perpetuating thing. Because of Amazon and the ecosystem that they and Microsoft would jointly create here, Seattle's population has been going crazy, especially with people with unbelievably high disposable income. You would not want to—in this day and age—execute this strategy and make that decision about Washington state. But Jeff Bezos hadn't created Amazon yet, therefore, it was a perfect place.

David: Actually, I could resonate with this my own personal story. Jeff had zero connection to Seattle. He didn't know anybody. I was exactly the same way when I came to Seattle.

Ben: Dude, it was the place where you got a VC job offer and you were like, I want to be a VC.

David: It's the land of opportunity, and it was the land of opportunity for Jeff Bezos. The legend is that he and MacKenzie are driving across the country, they realize this, they veer hard to the right in Texas, and instead of going west to California, they go northwest to Seattle.

Ben: Meanwhile, I think they've been on the phone with a lawyer incorporating the business while they've been driving out. That's the whole thing about the name. That's probably a story worth telling.

David: Definitely, the veering to the right while driving didn't happen, but it's a good story.

Ben: I think the thing that did happen while MacKenzie is driving and Jeff is working on the drive out is Jeff's on the phone with a lawyer. He's like, incorporate the business. I want it to be called Cadabra.

David: Like, oh, it's magic. I can get whatever I want.

Ben: Anything I want whenever I want. Jeff's like, yeah, Cadabra. He's like, Cadaver? That was the first sign of, this may not be the best name. He would have a series of other potentially bad names too, relentless.com.

David: Which still goes to Amazon.

Ben: It redirects to Amazon.

David: Supposedly, he and MacKenzie both really liked relentless.com. This may be completely false, so don't hold me to this, but I wonder if that's a little subtle dig at D. E. Shaw of, I'm going to go be a relentless entrepreneur. I wouldn't be relentless if I were in a cushy skyscraper in Manhattan.

Ben: It's not a very customer-centric name.

David: No, it's definitely not.

Ben: It's very much like I'm going to come at you, competitors.

David: That's what I wonder. Where did that come from?

Ben: Yeah. You would use it to describe Jeff's personality, but it's an odd name for the business.

David: Definitely. Eventually, friends convinced them that Relentless sounds sinister. The story goes that Jeff starts looking in the dictionary at A words. I don't know if he was specifically looking at A words. If so, he was very smart because A names are names starting with the letter A.

Ben: He actually was because sites like Yahoo, portal sites, and directory sites list it alphabetically.

David: Totally. We've been such a beneficiary of this at Acquired. This is our secret sauce.

Ben: [...] the last vestige of the old Internet.

David: Totally, because things are listed alphabetically what we will talk about, Yahoo. He's looking at A names. He's going through the list, and he sees Amazon. Perfect. Earth's largest river, earth's largest selection on amazon.com, A–Z, how could it be any more perfect?

Ben: It's so perfect.

David: They just need one more thing. They've hired Shel at this point. He's moving up to Seattle. They rent a house in Bellevue, famously. You actually biked by it the other day, right?

Ben: I did. I was in the neighborhood. I was listening to a great podcast on the Internet History Podcast with a friend of the show, Brian McCullough. He was interviewing Shel about the house that Jeff and MacKenzie lived in. They have the garage retrofitted to be Amazon's first office. Shel is programming sitting in that garage. I looked at it—it's a few blocks from me—and I was like, I got to ride by.

David: When you texted me the photo, I was so, so jealous.

Ben: Which felt wrong. Someone lives there and all that, but it is a historical landmark in the world.

David: You didn't go knock on the door. I think that's fine. They just need one more thing which is capital. Jeff and MacKenzie then create a D. E. Shaw. They put in $95,000 to start. Shel himself puts in $5000.

This takes me back to the Walmart episode. It's so smart, having your employees actually invest dollars in the business. Jeff's parents, Mike and Jackie, put in another $100,000. They have $200,000. That's enough.

They hire a couple more engineers to work with Shel and start building out the site. Jeff goes and starts working on relationships with Ingram and Baker & Taylor. MacKenzie's doing all the bookkeeping and is the first CFO of the company.

Jeff—this is fun—also echoes off Sam Walton. Did you read about this, how he goes down and takes a course in bookselling down in Portland?

Ben: Yes. That was awesome. At the National Bookseller or Book Retailers Association, right?

David: Totally. So smart. I assume that's how he starts to build relationships in the industry and get Baker & Taylor and Ingram to take him seriously. It's so great.

Ben: Yup. It's worth pointing out at this point. We glazed over it. All right, Shel gets hired, and he starts programming. There's a very interesting set of technology choices that are made here, and Shel turns out to be the perfect hire.

Jeff got very lucky. I don't think Amazon would exist today if it weren't for Shel. I think that's a widely acknowledged thing among the early team including Jeff, but there's not really a spec.

Jeff, I think, coded up the first HTML web page himself. That’s the white one with the A and the Amazon river running through it that predates the logo, but when he starts describing it to Shel, Shel is pretty much like, okay, cool. I know what to build. It's going to be a store. There are not a lot of these yet, but it's a website where you can buy stuff online, great. And he just starts coding.

There are a couple of interesting things here, one of which is the technology choice of databases. Do you know what database they would eventually choose to standardize on because Shel was not a database guy before this?

David: I'm tempted to say the Oracle.

Ben: Definitely Oracle. It was a bake-off between two, and Shel basically was like, okay, cool. What database software am I going to procure? The choices were Sybase and Oracle. Sybase did not return Shel's call, so he chose Oracle.

David: Talk about foreshadowing here. If you are an enterprise technology company, you ignore startups at your own peril.

Ben: Absolutely. I love that story. There are a couple of other interesting things here. Anybody who's been a PM or an engineer working on an engineer or PM team, a business guy, or tech guy team all knows this feeling.

Remember, the Internet at this point is very, very pathetic. It's just not the Internet as you think about it today in terms of speed, graphics, interface, trust, or anything, especially trust around credit cards. People were not yet comfortable entering credit cards on the Internet. In fact, more people were comfortable entering credit cards via email even though it was no more secure.

They actually got more people emailing them their credit card information. They had a way in which you could do stuff like, enter just five digits of your credit card, call us, and then we would get the rest of it from you and match it up with the five you had entered on your order.

But Jeff tells Shel, hey, people are going to want to access this store via two different methods. One of them is the web, which is, of course, up-and-coming, and the other of which is email, which people seem to trust a lot. Build two storefronts. One that's accessible via email and one that's accessible via web.

Shel just ignores the email thing. He's like, I'm in this technology a lot. I don't think it's going to be an email-based store. It's a good thing that he started with the web. By the time they had gotten that stood up, it was clear that Jeff had lost interest in the email-based store, but it was almost like a posterist-type approach where they're like, what if you could browse and buy from your email? That's how crappy the web was. It wasn't clear that that was a better form factor than email.

David: In Brad's book, I get the sense that that's very typical of the early-Jeff management style. We got to go do this. Some of them are like, you actually got to do it, and then somebody's like, well, if I ignore this for a little while, we're going to do the right thing here.

Ben: It also became clear in listening to a lot of these interviews with early engineers that they use the words front-end engineer and back-end engineer differently than we do today. Today when we say front-end and back-end, it means front-end being client-side, JavaScript, typically stuff that executes in your browser, which of course did not really work or exist then, and back-end meant server-side.

What was clear at Amazon in the early days was front-end meant consumer-facing and back-end meant warehouse-facing technology. It was basically all server-side. In fact, there weren't even cookies yet. Shel had to basically invent this way for users to maintain favorited items or a shopping cart without leaving a cookie.

How do you do that without cookies or sessions? He invented this really insane engine, basically a rendering engine, called Obidos, which if anybody knows their South American geography...

David: It's a tributary to the Amazon, right?

Ben: Yeah. For people who remember browsing Amazon in the early days, you'd go to amazon.com/exec/obidos/something-something-something.

David: I definitely didn't do this. This is awesome.

Ben: It was a part of the URLs. What Obidos did was it could append IDs to the URL and pass them through so that the back-end, as we know it in today's parlance of the server, could match up, oh, this customer just added this other thing to their cart, and so dynamically generate a new web page for them that includes that other thing in their cart. Or what would go on to be included you may also like, or similar products, or recommended personalized products.

David: So cool.

Ben: This was the very first thing that allowed Amazon to be like a dynamic web application without the use of cookies, and it was just passing these IDs through the URL. It was all this Obidos dynamic web serving engine that Shel built.

David: I love it. That's so cool. You're so right. He was the right guy for the job. This was a grizzled veteran of building software systems that could work on the Internet. There were not many people who could do that at that point in time.

Ben: No. In fact, in job postings, I think Bezos put things like experience with websites would be a bonus but not required. There weren't web developers, because there weren't web applications. You would think about it, like, hey, I need someone who can write some C-code and then figure out the glue to make it so that that interfaces with the HTML that gets generated. But that was all brand new at the time.

David: Amazing. Shel and the early team of engineers that they bring on working together get a beta bill pretty fast.

Ben: Really fast.

David: It was summer of 1994 when Jeff and MacKenzie left D. E. Shaw, and then it takes a few months to figure all this stuff out in the garage in Bellevue. In April of 1995, they shipped a beta version of the site. They sent out a link to friends and family, like, try it out. You can buy any book you want.

Shel's friend, John Wainwright makes the first purchase on April 3rd, 1995, a book called Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies by Douglas Hofstadter. Doug Hofstadter is awesome. He wrote Godel, Escher, Bach. It's super cool. It's all about the nature of consciousness and a carve out for another day. It's super cool and very apt, geeky, first purchase on amazon.com.

Ben: Again, illustrating the types of people who are interested in Amazon and the movement at the time were.

David: Yup. Then shortly after that, July 16th, 1995, they launched the site to the public. I totally understand now what Marc Andreessen was saying when he was like, I freaking missed it. I guess Marc was part of starting this wave, so he was talking about the previous wave. But me now, looking back, I'm like, we freaking missed it, Ben. I have FOMO.

Ben: You have FOMO. Yeah.

David: This would never happen today. They launched it and people came. People loved it. It freaking worked immediately.

Ben: Yeah, and it went very quickly from a thing that obscure nerds wanted, to this has a good enough user experience where regular people are using it quickly and deriving real value. It's not just like it had growth rates of a bunch of bots interacting with each other, and therefore the volume looks high.

These are very real people who are one or two clicks out from the early adopters, solving real problems that they had before, and everybody telling their friends. In fact, I think there's a stat. The entire first year after the public launch, they spent zero marketing dollars. It was all word of mouth and inbound media inquiries, because what they were doing was so novel and so useful to the mass market consumer.

David: Oh, inbound media inquiries. Okay, so they launched it. In the first two weeks, they do $25,000 in revenue. They're just people telling their friends. You can't do that today, $25,000 in revenue in two weeks. If you launch something today, nobody's going to use it.

They get an inbound media inquiry two weeks after they launch it from David Filo and Jerry Yang, saying, hey, we heard about your site, Amazon, it looks pretty cool. Do you mind if we feature it on our homepage?

Ben: And Jeff's like, wait a minute, your homepage, I think a lot of people go to that.

David: That was the brand new, at that point, literally brand new, yahoo.com. David and Jerry, of course, had started their Guide to the Web when they were Stanford grad students the year before in 1994. They had just incorporated and raised money from Sequoia Capital, turned it into an actual business, and created Yahoo only in March of 1995.

Ben: Wow.

David: It's all happening all at once. Got to assume it was the first place to buy books featured on the front page with the letter A on yahoo.com.

Ben: Growth hack.

David: Apparently, they get the email.

Ben: Had they raised their seed round, their million dollar angel round yet?

David: No. All that context you had on Shel, oh, this makes so much more sense now. I thought he was just being conservative, but he knows what he's doing. They get the email and they're all talking about what to do. And Shel's like, guys, I don't think we're ready for this. I don't think we can handle what's about to happen here.

Ben: Because he's only been at startups that didn't really work.

David: Yes.

Ben: He made stuff functional. He was thinking of a certain scale, but he wasn't thinking like millions scale.

David: Of course, Jeff being Jeff is like, damn the torpedoes. Full speed ahead. We're doing this. We're going to say yes to Yahoo. They did it within the next two weeks. We're just four weeks after launch here. They have sold books to people in all 50 states in the country and 45 countries around the world. By the end of those two weeks, they are doing $20,000 in sales a week

Ben: On books. These things cost like $20 or $30 each.

David: And people don't read books. Yeah, there's Barnes & Noble, but people don't read books. They made all their money on DVDs and CDs. Nobody reads books. We—I mean you, me, and the Acquired community—read books, but we're a vast minority.

Ben: Most Americans read one book a year. I think that's the mode of number of books per year per person.

David: Totally. That first half year that the site was live to the public, they did half a million dollars in revenue in six months with the $200,000 and friends and family funding.

Ben: The initial insight is a pretty perfect product/market fit right out of the gate. It's one of these situations. It's like an Uber or a Twitter where you have this idea, then you put it up, and then that's exactly the thing that people want.

David: I'm sure there will come an age again like this in some way, shape, or form, but I can't stress enough. This does not happen today. I'm feeling the FOMO.

Ben: The question is, David, would you have recognized it?

David: That's the thing.

Ben: We all have to be intellectually honest with ourselves. Would we be hanging out in these circles with these people and truly believing like they did, not in 1996 that the Internet was going to be a thing, in 1993 that the Internet was going to be a thing?

David: Yup. We sorted this a little bit not intentionally with podcasting, I think, in Acquired. A little bit, we got a similar type wave.

Ben: Honestly, now judging by what you and I were doing a few years later, I do actually think we would have had the personality characteristics and the interests if we were not young children at this time to be caught up in all this. In some ways, I'm feeling the massive FOMO of like, God, if I was just born 5 or 10 years earlier.

David: This is who we are, and I imagine many of our listeners are, too.

Ben: I imagine if you're listening to three-hour podcasts, then you're the type of person who wanted to buy an obscure book from someone on the Internet or you had to call on your credit card number.

David: The infrastructure is just completely falling apart.

Ben: One thing they did do right in the infrastructure, though, because by the way, very quickly, they became Oracle's largest ever instance by traffic. The Oracle people were like, oh, my God, we can't help you. No one else is seeing this many reads or writes per second, so let us make a new version for you.

One thing that was very clear is that Shel and the team were building things at a very low level of abstraction. They were building everything in basically a click off from Assembly. Most of the stuff was in C, some of it was in Perl, but they're not really writing in high-level languages or using high-level frameworks.

Even though the technology at the time sucked—there was no bandwidth, compute was really, really, really hard to come by—you had to be unbelievable efficient as you're starting to roll out things like—and I know we'll get to this—reviews and the collaborative filtering stuff where it was like, you may also like people who bought this also bought.

The algorithms mattered a lot, but the environments that you were writing them in, the low-level languages were really important. They basically can take advantage of these early Internet technologies before the bandwidth and compute was really ready for most people to develop applications for them.

David: Totally right. I guess I meant technology, to some extent, the tech in infrastructure. I meant more like the garage. Here's the kicker of why this never would have worked within D. E. Shaw. It's super clear you can't do drop shipping. Amazon's got to handle the logistics themselves to make this work.

Ben: And the way they were doing that was not to take inventory at the time. They were ordering retail first from other bookstores, then reselling it, and just eating the margin as the proof of concept. But then they were moving to this world where they would just order from the distributor as soon as they got an order. It was taking, obviously, forever to actually get that to the customer.

David: The distributors had minimum order sizes. They were ordering big boxes of stuff come into the garage.

Ben: Do you know the hack? Let's say they ordered a popular book, where pretty quickly you could get to 8 out of 10. Let's say the minimum order size was 10. They'd wait to get two more.

David: I think it was 10.

Ben: Yeah, and they could place an order with the distributor. The hack was if it's an obscure book and they know we're never going to get to 10, they would take that one book and they would order nine of a book that they knew was not in stock, the system would let them make the order since 10 books could be shipped out, and then of course, they would get the rejection of, hey, this book’s out of stock. That was their hack to make it so the distributors would actually send them the one copy of the one book that they wanted.

David: The sales levels we're talking about, there are a lot of boxes coming and going out of the garage.

Ben: Yes.

David: Quickly, they get a warehouse in SoDo, in the industrial neighborhood down by the kingdom at that point in time. They start staffing it up with temp workers. Famously, they tell the staffing agency to "send us your freaks."

Ben: Which made it through to print in an article, and of course, that was the clickbait thing that everyone anchored on.

David: This was the era of grunge in Seattle. All these grunge club musicians are working in Amazon warehouses after their gigs. It's super cool.

Famously, Nic Lovejoy from D. E. Shaw, comes up with the idea of packing tables. This becomes Amazon lore. First, they literally just reassembled and did shipping just on their hands and knees on the floor. It was like, we should get some tables to do this up above the floor.

Ben: Yeah. On the send-us-your-freaks thing, there's this great interview with Jane Slade that Brian McCullough did, where she's the one who gave the quote in that interview about send-us-your-freaks. She said that because the temp agency was sending them all these people that were basically professionals. They would expect to use modern tools.

On Amazon, the low level software thing wasn't just for their infrastructure. They expected their customer service people to use Unix terminals and write commands, so that it would send right in. They're like, where's my order? Everything's on the command line. Jade's using that to try to articulate to the temp agency. Here's the profile of a person that we need because all these people are useless to us if they expect a bunch of very good tools to do their job.

David: I didn't know that context. That's awesome. What's cool here is these are quaint stories, but this is the beginning of the competitive advantage and the moat that Amazon starts to build. We're going to talk about eBay in a minute here. It's just like the Walmart story in fighting against Kmart and other people.

Amazon is now building a native logistics supply chain and distribution for ecommerce that they are going to own and operate, that literally nobody else in the world is doing this. Not Walmart, not Kmart, not Barnes & Noble. They all have their own incredible logistics systems, but they're tuned for, I've got this book superstore that has 80,000 titles, and I've got thousands of them across the country. Amazon's building distribution for, I have millions of customers across the world.

Ben: And basically, no two orders are the same. I always need to put a unique brand new combination of books into a box every single time. That is a totally different combinatorial problem to solve than the Walmart thing of, hey, we need to make sure that a truck goes from this distribution center to this store once a day with about this stuff and maybe there can be a little variance. It's completely new.

Amazon needed to fail completely, invent something new tailored to their use case, and then suddenly be the industry leader for the way you do that thing on the Internet. Packing tables is such a great first paradigm of, oh, our warehouses will need these, but other distribution centers in the Walmart land and that old school world don't. That would just happen 10,000 times again, compound, and compound, and compound.

David: There are big differences between the Walmart supply chain, and the Barnes & Noble supply chain, and Amazon, but eBay sure as hell isn't building packing tables. They need some more money to capitalize all this. Jeff goes out to raise that first seed round. We did the whole episode with Tom Alberg back in the early Acquired days. Tom is just the best.

Ben: Tom is the best. I re-listened to that episode and I was thinking like, oh, it's going to be terrible because this was very early in Acquired. It's so not. It's very listenable, and most of that is because Tom was an unbelievable guest. He's kind and he also is so earnest, but lived the whole thing. He was an early check in Amazon in that $1 million on $5 million post money round and stayed the course with Jeff all the way through the late 2010s as a board member.

David: Yeah, longest serving board member in Amazon history other than Jeff. It's so cool. They raised that $1 million round from a bunch of local business folks in Seattle of which Tom is one and one of the most involved in the company.

Ben: Nick Hanauer, a bunch of local business folks here.

David: In 1996, remember they did half a million in revenue for the half year of 1995 that they're alive. They did $15.7 million in revenue in 1996. They have a tiger by the tail here. You would have to be accelerating so much to go from whatever the run rate was in December of 1995.

Ben: They about 15X'd in their first year, but they 15X'd off a base of 500,000. It's not off of nothing.

David: Yeah, they didn't go from 5-100 or something like that.

Ben: When I'm looking at SaaS companies, I'm like, oh, my God, you quadrupled? That's nearly unheard of. Good companies triple.

David: And then you look at it and it's like you went from $20,000 ARR to $100,000 ARR.

Ben: Right, and this is yeah, wow, $500,000 in six months to $15.7 million the following year. Okay, that's 1996.

David: That's 1996. As this rise is happening, obviously, more and more people start paying attention. Go listen to the whole episode. Tom tells the story on our episode with him. I'll just quote from Tom here. "I come home one night after work at like 6:00 PM or something and my wife says, do you know some guy named John Doerr? I said, well, actually I do. She said, well, he calls every 15 minutes and keeps saying he needs to talk to you now." And then Tom says, "It was one of John's great strengths, which is his persistence. It tells you something about how to sell yourself and show your interest." Of course, that is the legendary John Doerr of Kleiner Perkins.

Ben: It's been many years and there are lots of names of key folks at Sequoia, NetBenchmark, and Andreessen Horowitz, that we think of as, wow, these incredible venture capitalists. John Doerr was pretty widely known to be the greatest of all time at this point in history.

David: He was like all of today's all stars in venture capital within the industry and among founders. If you aggregate all of those all stars into one single person, that would have been John Doerr at that point in time. This shows you how much clout John had.

Hey, just the hustle, the persistence. Even though he was the legendary John Doerr, he's calling Tom every 15 minutes, calling Tom's wife, to get a lead on the deal. Amazon ends up choosing Kleiner to lead their Series A, $8 million at a $60 million post money valuation.

Ben: I think they were competing against General Atlantic.

David: Many firms, including General Atlantic, which was the first runner up. There was some structure to the deal. The Kleiner term sheet was clean. I don't remember exactly what the structure was, but Tom refers to this on our episode. They were a New York firm—General Atlantic—but they were offering double the valuation, close to double, I think.

Amazon and Jeff went with John and Kleiner, because they were John and Kleiner. There's a fun little sidebar of John winning the deal, and this is his playbook at the time. Great, I'm going to be involved, but I got this green associate who I'm going to put on your board, and it's going to be great. VCs still do this today.

Jeff wasn't too happy about this, so he goes to talk to Tom like, what should I do about this? They brainstormed and they came up with an idea. Jeff calls John back and he's like, I'm really sorry. I really wanted to work with Kleiner Perkins then, but I guess we're going to be going with General Atlantic. If you're not going to join my board, that was really the appeal for me.

Ben: And John's like, I don't have the bandwidth. I'm on too many other boards right now. He's got Netscape.

David: Netscape, Compaq, Sun Microsystems, Intuit. This is before Google. We will definitely talk about Google in a minute, but he's a little busy.

Ben: Nothing to sneeze at.

David: But this was such a hot deal. Jeff was so persuasive that John made time. I think he's probably glad that he made time to join the board. There is this money from Kleiner. Jeff does two things.

Ben: And this was $7 million?

David: $8 million.

Ben: So far, in the lifetime of the company, he raised $9 million.

David: A little more than $9 million because there were the friends and family money, the Bezos family as a whole.

Ben: $9.2 million?

David: It was actually more like $9.4 million because the Bezos family as a whole, not just Jeff's parents, Jackie and Mike, but also his siblings put a little more money in before the Kleiner round. That was what we were alluding to at the beginning of the show of, gosh, man, Mike and Jackie, they must have done some good investing.

Ben: Which is funny because that's Bezos's siblings having some of the greatest investment returns of all time. It proves venture capital is access, access, access.

David: I cannot wait to talk about how Jeff Bezos and McKenzie got wealthy. We got to wait just a little bit longer. We got to wait a little longer.

Ben: All right.

David: Jeff does two things after he raises the round from Kleiner. I didn't write down the quote, but somebody who was involved in the company at that point said something like, Jeff viewed this stamp of imprimatur from Kleiner and John Doerr as a shot of steroids into himself and the company.

Ben: It’s really emboldened his vision. He used this as someone waving the flag of like, go, go go. You should feel free to have a much, much more ambitious plan now.

David: I don't think Jeff's the kind of person who ever felt like he needed permission. But to the extent, he did feel like he needed permission or that the right thing to do was to get big fast, which is one thing that he does. He makes that the motto.

Ben: Which literally became the motto, which printed on t-shirts at the company holiday party. Yeah.

David: Get big, fast. Yup. The Kleiner round and John joining the board was absolutely that for him. He also makes a critical hire, which is the first official professional CFO into the company, Joy Covey, to come on at this time.

Ben: Who originally had zero interest. This is another person who is unbelievably accomplished, really brilliant, curious, but she lives in California, she's not going to move to Seattle. She's only marginally interested, but Jeff and she meets, and she's completely turned around. She's like, oh, my God, I have to work with this guy. And oh, my God, this is the best business model of all time.

David: I'm sure John had something to do with this. My understanding from the history is that one of John's real superpowers was recruiting. It was winning deals, obviously, but helping companies recruit, too.

Joy's story is just amazing. She dropped out of high school and then ended up becoming a CPA. She took the CPA exam in California and got (I think) the second highest score in the history of the exam, and ended up going on to both Harvard Business School and Harvard Law School. She dropped out of high school. Her life was going in one direction. There are so many people like that involved in Amazon that are just these incredible stories of perseverance.

Ben: As a lot of folks know, we're talking about Joy in the past tense, because she sadly passed away in 2013 in a bicycle accident. A car hit her, so absolutely tragic. A brilliant, kind person who the world lost too early. Just to keep going on Joy a little bit, we're going to talk about the Amazon letter, which many of you have read, that original 1997 letter to shareholders, which she wrote with Jeff.

Of course, as we talk about Amazon, really the playbook of how they got big, we'll talk a lot about them reinvesting every single dollar of profit they had to plow it back in to grow the business. That is, of course, attributable to Jeff, but is in large part of Joy Covey invention, too. She was really the co-architect of that strategy.

David: She spent a lot of time with Brad as he was writing The Everything Store. She wrote him this email right before she had the accident and tragically passed away. Brad publishes the whole thing at the end of the book, and I'll just quote from it here.

Joyce telling Brad, "I think about the early days and the level of clarity, vision, potential, and values that Jeff brought. Then I look at Amazon today," this was in 2013, "and reflect on some conversations I have had with him in the intervening years. It is easy to draw a straight line from the vision he had back then to the Amazon of today. There were a few little wobbles and detours in places, but really I don't know any other company that has created such a juggernaut that is so consistent with the original ideas of the founder. It's almost like he fired an arrow and then followed that arc. I think Jeff is one of the most capable and effective founders ever, and I think the Amazon Juggernaut is still in its early stages."

Ben: Which she would have been right about in 2013.

David: Oh, my God. We're not going to get to 2013 in this episode, but that was a crazy thing to say in 2013. Amazon was a $120 billion market cap company when she said that. Not many people would have said that.

Ben: Amazon is just this incredible Rorschach test. There is a way to look at it where he shot an arrow and then followed the arrow straight. There's another way to look at it, which is they tried way more things that did not work than ones that did but were unbelievable at learning from the mistakes and quickly following them.

The only thing that Amazon launched that had perfect product/market fit right away was amazon.com. It was the original idea, and then everything else was a brute force algorithm for finding your way through a maze, where it's just like, try this pathway, oh, crap, nope. backup, backup, backup, backup, refine, turn. The Amazon brute forced their way to success a lot and just finding out where all the doors were by trying all of them.

David: Yup. That is a great way to put it.

Ben: It is worth highlighting at this period of time, this 94-97, this pre going public time. Even though they had the imprimatur, as you put it, David, of Kleiner Perkins, even though they were located in Seattle near Microsoft, even though they had this product/market fit and unbelievable 15X year over year growth in revenue dollars, not like usage revenue, and customer retention was increasing like every single metric of the business was like, oh, my God, oh, my God, oh, my God, the Internet is going crazy.

A bookstore actually doesn't look like an interesting thing on the Internet to most engineers. They actually had a recruiting problem, where talented engineers who were like, oh, my God, this is a really interesting next generation technology that I want to build on, are much more interested in working at other companies who are building web applications. Things like search engines. Even things like you mentioned, eBay, that we'll get to here in a second. In many ways, that’s a much harder computational problem of building a good experience and back-end system for facilitating a real time auction.

David: Marketplace, yeah.

Ben: And countdowns. The online bookstore thing seems boring, so it's remarkably hard for them to recruit.

David: There are a couple of great Eric Schmidt quotes in The Everything Store. Eric Schmidt, of course, the former CEO of Google. This is so good. They're begrudging backhanded compliments to Amazon and Jeff, but one of them is talking about AWS. It was like, oh, the book guys figured out computer science. Of course, we're telling this story like, Jeff freaking new computer science back in the...

Ben: And he was fighting that narrative from day one. He wanted it to be a technology company. Everyone was like, you're a retailer, and even one click down, you're a book retailer. He's like, we are a technology company, and he willed them being a technology company into existence. I don't think anybody now is like, oh, they're a retailer or oh, they are any specific category of retailer. They're like, yeah, they're a dominant technology firm.

David: Now he probably wishes that people were like, oh, don't worry about Amazon.

Okay, back to the story. Joy joins right at the end of 1996, right after the Kleiner round. Jeff, definitely because he wanted to do it and is consistent with get big fast, maybe it was also this test for his new high potential CFO, like, I'm going to see what she's really made of. He's like, we're going to go public now.

Tom talked about this, too, in our interview with him. Part of it was when the capital markets were opened. The revenue growth was insane, the dot-com mania is just starting to heat up. strength leads to strength, and all of that. Jeff also thought that it would be a great marketing event for the company, and he was totally right. The amount of coverage they got in mainstream media.

Even though John Doerr joined the board, an average person didn't give a crap about John Doerr, venture capital, or startups. It was not like today. John Doerr was a legend in Silicon Valley, but that was a very small place. Amazon needed to appeal to millions of people of all types all over the country and the world.

Ben: And it turned out they did get something right in this notion of longtail books. There are very few people who want one particular book in the longtail, but most people want something in the longtail. Their product/market fit originally came from, we can get you special order books quickly and easily. Your user experience and buying them will be basically the same as buying a Harry Potter book, a best seller.

David: This gets alluded to in The Everything Store. A function of amazon.com that was appealing to mainstream America was buying stuff that you wouldn't necessarily want to walk into a store and order yourself in person from your neighbors.

Ben: Like every new technology.

David: Like every new technology, let's just leave it at that.

Ben: Yes. The other thing to point out about them identifying books is there's this seminal Wall Street Journal piece about the company in 1996 that drives a lot of traffic. It's like the Yahoo event on steroids. They have this really interesting stat, which is in 1995, the web attracted more than 100,000 retailers, which I would not have guessed that happened until Shopify. Apparently, that happened in 1995.

With some spending more than a million dollars each on eye-popping sites, yet worldwide retail sales on the web amounted to just $324 million last year, which averages out to slightly more than 3000 in sales per retailer. Amazon nailed a category and an operational model, where they were able to be the one dominant ecommerce site. This predates pets.com, this predates cosmo.com, eBay. They were almost the earliest. They were of the first wave and just nailed it on a bunch of vectors.

There's this great quote from Jane Slade, "There were no grown ups that could help us." Every time they would bring in a vendor for customer service software, database software, or anything, the implementation reps will just look at all the numbers and be like, what? Our software actually can't help you. They had to build a lot of this stuff in-house because they were basically the only successful, big retailer of this scale using the Internet.

David: Like we learned on the Walmart episode. If the infrastructure off the shelf for what you need to do to make your beer doesn't exist and you want to make your beer taste better, you have to build your own infrastructure.

Ben: For sure. This is probably a good time, David, before we dive into the IPO roadshow to tell us about something else that can help you make your beer taste better by taking the stuff that doesn't make your beer taste better off your plate, pilot.com.

David: Ben, perfect tee up. I love it.

Ben: You like how I moved it?

David: I do. We should say on this episode and our next one too, pilot.com backed by Bezos expeditions, Jeff Bezos himself, and of course, many other great venture capital firms like Sequoia Capital, Index, and others.

Pilot, as many folks now know, one of our absolute favorite companies on Acquired, set up and operate the entire financial stack that you need as a startup and growing company. That's finance, accounting, tax, even higher level Joy Covey, like CFO services, investor reporting, strategic planning, all of which otherwise, you would hire an old school accounting firm or go try and recruit a Joy Covey to do.

In today's startup world, unlike Amazon back in the day, all of this stuff is standardized. It does not make your beer taste better. You just need to be the best in class. You need to access and you need it done. Pilot does that for you.

Ben: Of course, you might be thinking, well, my stuff is too specialized. I need someone in-house. I need a firm of people to help me. Pilot has recognized this and they say, look, we're a product and we have people that you work with. They're a combination of human powered and product powered.

Of course the product is not just login and you get some nicer UX on your bookkeeping software. It is fully integrated with whatever fancy financial stack they're using because the founders started it pretty recently in this era.

David: And they're technologists themselves. This is not their first company. They sold their last company to Dropbox. The other thing that's completely changed for most companies and startups now versus the Amazon days is there is a whole sea of technology providers that you need to use as a company that impact your finances—the Stripes, the Plaids, the Modern Treasurys.

All of these companies that you build your product on and your revenue on, all have APIs. An old school accounting firm is not going to connect directly to your stripe API, but Pilot of course does. They take literally all of the headache of finance and accounting off your plate. Pilot, this is their beer. They integrate with Stripe, Brex, Gusto, Shopify, Square, et cetera, everything. They all make it work seamlessly with your books and your financial reporting.

Go on over to pilot.com/acquired or click the link in the show notes. Make your life way easier as a founder, get back to focusing on what makes your beer taste better, and eliminate the pain of tax prep and bookkeeping from your company for good. Thanks to the founders who we've referred to—Waseem, Jessica, and Jeff—all good buddies and Acquired friends.

Acquired listeners, if you use that link, you will get 20% off your first six months of service. So many of the companies I invest in now and work with use Pilot. I highly recommend them.

Ben: Thanks, Pilot.

David: Okay, Joy joins at the end of 1996. Jeff's like, we're going to go public now. In the spring of 1997, they filed to go public with lead underwriters, not Goldman Sachs, not Morgan Stanley, Deutsche Bank and some might say it's uber bankers, Frank Quattrone and Bill Gurley leading the IPO. It's so cool.

We asked Tom on the Amazon IPO episode that we did, why did Jeff and Amazon choose Deutsche Bank over the gold plated, never get fired for choosing Goldman Sachs or Morgan Stanley? Tom's answer was, well, if you knew Quattrone and Gurley, you would know that the answer is Quattrone and Gurley.

Ben: Yes. Of course, Frank Quattrone has gone on to do a bunch of very impressive deals at Catalyst and Bill Gurley became future Bill Gurley. Yes, but this is in his banking career.

David: Now, when they filed to go public but before they actually did go public, just like Jeff was envisioning, this attracts a lot of attention. That's mostly a good thing.

Ben: He's correct on the marketing exercise. This is a big way to legitimize them to consumers. It enables many more people to feel comfortable typing their credit card on the Internet, things like that.

David: Everything like that. Also, this other thing, ultimately, is a good thing, too, but not at the time. It attracts the attention of the Riggio brothers, who are the founders and CEO and chairman of Barnes & Noble. They knew about Amazon, but they're like, whatever, Amazon, Internet, we don't need to worry about that. All of a sudden, this little company in Seattle has filed to go public.

Ben: And is claiming to be earth's largest bookstore.

David: And they’re like, that doesn't sound right to us. I just think of Borders. Barnes & Noble is great, but Borders was the big thing. But now we know from the Walmart episode, Borders was out of the game. Kmart had acquired them, the founders had moved on, Louis Borders had moved on to start a Webvan. It's so great.

Ben: Isn't that crazy?

David: Barnes & Noble was the juggernaut. The Riggio brothers, when Amazon filed for an IPO, fly out to Seattle. They scheduled a dinner with Jeff. Jeff brings along Tom. Tom, in addition to being just a wonderful human, great advice, mentor to both of us, he was a lawyer earlier in his career. He was like a very high profile corporate lawyer. He's got the right set of skills to bring to this dinner.

The Riggio brothers, their father, was a New York City cab driver and a semi-professional boxer who twice defeated Rocky Graziano. Len, the lead of the two of them, I think the older brother, technically did go to NYU. Let's just say they went to the University of Hard Knocks. Their way of doing business is very different.

Also, we got to talk about this. I don't think you have any idea. Do you know, just like we talked about last episode about the whole crazy Borders, Kmart, Webvan, Kiva came out of Webvan, which of course, Amazon acquired and this...

Ben: Right, Kiva Robotics.

David: Yup, incredible history. Do you know what the Riggio brothers spun out of Barnes & Noble? I'm not talking about the Nook or barnesandnoble.com. You're never going to guess this.

Ben: No.

David: It actually makes sense. GameStop.

Ben: No way. Really?

David: I'm dead serious. It was actually Software Etc.

Ben: I got to look at the stock price of both of these.

David: Gamestop is the merger of Software Etc, which spun out of Barnes & Noble and Babbage's software. Remember Babbage's back in the day?

Ben: Sounds vaguely familiar.

David: They were a video game and computer software retailer. Yeah, GameStop, freaking GameStop.

Ben: Oh, my God. Okay, what do you think Barnes & Noble Education Inc is from a market cap perspective today?

David: Maybe $500 million?

Ben: $143 million.

David: Okay, what's GameStop today?

Ben: $10.3 billion.

David: Yeah.

Ben: Built purely from an intrinsic value model that I have here in front of me.

David: Stonks, baby.

Ben: I assume Barnes & Noble Education Inc is Barnes & Noble, the big company. BNED is their ticker.

David: I think there might have been a bankruptcy there. I'm not sure.

Ben: Yeah, that makes sense. I don't think you end up cratering this far without some recapitalisation or something happening.

David: Speaking of Barnes & Noble cratering, this dinner didn't help. These two tough New York guys, they're like, where you came from, business of nerd out in Seattle? Go listen to our episode with Tom. His personality is not blustery, brash New Yorker. I'm sure the Riggios came to this dinner and they were just like, we're going to freaking crush these geeks. Oh, boy, did they not? So they go home after the dinner.

Ben: The dinner was like a soft we-want-to-buy-you, or was the dinner a soft we're-going-to-run-you-out-of-business?

David: It was both. It was, hey, we've heard about you. You know we're Barnes & Noble, right? We've been thinking about doing the Internet. We're going to do it. We could buy you and you could be our internet thing or we could crush you. I think that's how the dinner went.

Ben: By the way, the 1996 Wall Street Journal piece that did wake the world up to this, was titled Wall Street Whiz Finds Niche Selling Books on the Internet. I always think back on the Wall Street whiz for Jeff Bezos.

David: Actually, what the Riggio brothers are saying, this is what everybody thinks when Amazon does go public. It's not a great IPO. On May 15th 1997, they raised $54 million at a $438 million market cap, and then they trade down on day one.

Ben: It was like $17 a share that they went public at, and then I think they traded down on day one. They would eventually trade all the way down to like $5 a share in the dot-com bust.

David: It would rock it back up. They went through the wave and then the fall. The head of Forrester Research, the big research firm, write a note about Amazon and the industry.

Ben: Called Amazon.toast.

David: They titled it Amazon.toast, and it's not because of eBay, it's not because of blah-blah-blah, it's not because of the dot-com crash. It's because they think Barnes & Noble is going to kill them. Oh, boy.

What were the Riggio brothers doing? They went back home to New York and they did two things. They launched a new project, a new initiative within the company with the code name Book Predator.

Ben: In case there was any confusion.

David: In case there's any confusion about what the intent of this is, and that they're going to kill Amazon with the new barnesandnoble.com. The other thing they do is sue Amazon. They conveniently for them (or inconveniently for Amazon) announced the lawsuit three days before the IPO prices, hence the Amazon.toast memo. They sued them for, Ben, what you said of Amazon claiming to have earth's largest selection of books. I think the suit is like, well, you don't have a store, you can't go select the books.

Ben: That's so pedantic and annoying.

David: Like I said, the IPO happens. It's not great. The stock trades off. But a couple of weeks later, Amazon does their first quarterly financial reporting as a public company. They report Q2 1997 earnings of $28 million. Remember, they only did $15.7 million the whole year before. They did $28 million that quarter.

Ben: Unbelievable.

David: Wall Street reverses course, the stock takes off. For the full year of 1997, they do just a hair under $150 million in revenue. That's 10X the year before.

Ben: Oh, my God. 10X-ing on that base, especially right when you're going public. This is the stuff that makes investors go nuts. You can see how this very quickly becomes a darling stock.

David: When I said that Barnes & Noble was going to launch Book Predator and beat Amazon, I was like, okay. What do I mean by okay? This starts a pattern. It would be hubris of Jeff, Joy, MacKenzie and everybody, and Shel at Amazon to just say okay and not do anything about it. But this is Amazon, and they know this is a problem. They know they can beat them, but they have to go beat them, and they know what the path is. Jeff, Made in America is like his Bible. Yes. He knows the Walmart story.

Ben: By the way, listeners, we weren't going to do the Walmart story. We actually were going to do this as the first episode of the season. We got into researching Amazon and realized how much Jeff respected and borrowed from the Walmart strategy. We're like, I guess we got to tell that story first.

David: There are a couple moments coming up where he interacts with Walmart. He brings along his copy, his scrawled in notes, marked up, and dog-eared copy of Made in America, to show these people who we're going to talk about. They're like, no, Sam is my hero. I'm not just some geek. I understand what we're doing here.

Jeff, because of this, because he's read Made in America, he knows that he can be Barnes & Noble, but the way to do it is through distribution by building native distribution logistics supply chain for ecommerce not for physical stores. It is different enough that just like Walmart could build native distribution for their network of Walmart Supercenters. That was very different than the Kmart coming out of Kresge distribution that they were piggybacking off of.

Jeff's like, we can do the same thing here, but we have to do it. I know we need to do it, but I can't really do it, but I know some people who can.

In early 1997, he and Joy, together—I think, according to Brad, it was very much a joint effort of both of them, probably John Doerr was involved too—start traveling to Bentonville on recruiting trips.

Ben: Canvas and poach.

David: It was canvas and poach. They zero in on a target.

Ben: Rick Dalzel?

David: Their number one draft pick, Rick Dalzel.

Ben: I think they had been courting him before the IPO, but he didn't end up joining till after.

David: Yes, it was like a year-long recruitment process to get Rick to join. At one point, he actually commits to joining and then backs out. He was really conflicted about this.

Ben: He's super plugged in in the Bentonville community. He's an important part of Walmart.

David: Not only was he deeply embedded in the Bentonville community, Rick was technically the number two person in IT at Walmart. As we talked about last episode, you naively might hear that sentence and be like, number two person in IT at Walmart, who's that? No, Walmart was an amazing technology company and especially distribution supply chain logistics. They're the best in the world.

Ben: At this point, they had been the largest computerized logistics and distribution company in the world, and operated their own private satellite network to communicate amongst all their stores, and had been doing that for a dozen years. A very impressive back-end technology.

David: They were the first big corporation in America to adopt technology and say, that is going to be the heart of what we do. Rick was the lieutenant who implemented it all. He was the hands-on guy doing it. Jeff, Joy, John, and the board, they were like, if we can get this guy, he's the key.

They go through this year-long recruitment process. Like I said, at one point, they convinced Rick to join, and then he called him back and he's like, no, I'm not going to do it. He calls him back because Lee Scott, Walmart's CEO, the third CEO of Walmart in history, takes Rick aside when he hears this. He's like, Rick, you've got a future here. You could be a future CEO of Walmart. You're making a big mistake.

He says, you're making a big mistake. He says, which he's totally right on, look, we've studied these Amazon guys, Walmart is no Barnes & Noble. They know what's going on. He's like, we know how they're doing distribution over there. They're going to hit a brick wall when they get to any kind of scale, which clearly they're going to get to this year. It's going to all fall apart over there. You know that, you know how this works. You would be committing career suicide if you go take this job.

Ben: That was the risk. It paid off in a huge, huge way, largely because Rick was very successful at doing what needed to be done, but that is for sure the risk of making the jump.

David: Eventually, Amazon, Jeff, Joy, and everybody, convinced Rick to make the jump. Right before the IPO in early 1997, he joins. Jeff knows they're going to win at this point.

Brad writes in The Everything Store, "Bezos had predicted that Barnes and Noble would have trouble seriously competing online, and in the end, he was right. The Riggios were reluctant to lose money on a relatively small part of their business, and didn't want to put their most resourceful employees behind an effort that would siphon sales away from the more profitable stores.

On top of that, their company's distribution operation was well entrenched and geared towards servicing physical stores by sending out large shipments of books to a certain number of locations. The shift from that to mailing small orders to individual customers was long, painful, and full of customer service errors. For Amazon, that was just daily business."

There we go. Rick, he alone joining is huge. He also airlifts about a dozen executives out of Walmart to come join him. When he finally does officially accept the offer, Walmart's like, you're dead to us. He gets escorted out of his office by security and the whole thing, which in retrospect was a mistake by Walmart, because that just makes everybody more curious inside Walmart. Like, dang, Rick, he could have been CEO at this place and he just went to go and be head of IT at this company. I better go find out what they're doing, I want to follow Rick.

Ben: At this point, Amazon is well underway from transforming a culture of misfits and geeks who want to be able to ship rare books online to MBA city. This is where they're getting experienced executives. They're really turning on the recruiting engine from top business schools and Walmart.

There are two different ways to look at Amazon. I think on this show, we focus a lot on the business side of it, where there's an unbelievable cash flow dynamic that we'll talk about, there's the whole get the investors you asked for, there's the constant reinvesting in growth.

But up to this point, when you listen to these interviews with Shel Kaphan, or reading all the stories on Greg Linden's blog who was an early engineer, or all the interviews Glenn Fleishman has given, it really is about adapting technologies that were not really ready yet being the first and biggest and being with misfits on the Internet.

There was a big exiting of the 1994–1997 crowd in 1998 and 1999 as Dalzel, his people, and all the MBAs come in to say, okay, it's working and it's not just about this quest for odd books.

David: Yup. I actually would put Dalzel on the Walmart crew. I think there are three key categories of people that were necessary for Amazon to succeed. There were the technologists—Shel in the early days and the freaks and geeks—but then that evolved into a world class technology organization over time.

There were the MBAs that we're going to talk about in a minute. The Andy Jassys, the Jason Kilars, the Harrison Millers, the Jeff Blackburns. And then there were the Walmart people, the Rick Dalzel. Jeff, he didn't come from Walmart, but he's very much cut from that cloth, the back-end retail logistics distribution people. And you really need a world class, all three of those to make this work.

On the distribution and supply chain front, more than a dozen Walmart executives come over to Amazon. In late 1998, Walmart sues Amazon for trying to steal trade secrets. The case settles with no damages, but there was damage. It happened. That DNA came right out of Walmart and right into Amazon. To be fair, like we said, it's a different thing than the Walmart supply chain that they're building. It's the Amazon supply chain.

Ben: Which they didn't realize enough of that first. There were all sorts of false starts in Amazon getting good at distribution because even though they knew better, they were copying the Walmart playbook. They were doing the classic Amazon thing. They were bruteforcing their way through the maze, learning from mistakes, backing up, turning left, and going the other direction, but they needed to go bump into that wall to do it.

David: Yup. When Dalzel comes over and all the Walmart folks, they had the warehouse in Seattle. They said, no, no, no, you don't want a warehouse, you want a distribution center. Because a distribution center, that's the Walmart model. That's Walmart with the first distribution centers, you want something more sophisticated.

In 1998, they go from the one warehouse in Seattle to six distribution centers, the Seattle warehouse becomes one, Delaware, Nevada, Georgia, two in Kentucky. Do you notice they're going to all these states that are close to big population states, but not in the States?

Ben: Yes.

David: But then it actually was Wilke later who said, no, we don't want distribution centers, we want fulfillment centers. That's what Amazon is today. There is a fundamental difference of we're not distributing a bunch of goods to stores, we are fulfilling end-customer orders.

Ben: To end-customers, every single one uniquely, and we need to optimize them to make every single order happen for the very first time it's ever happened in an unpredictable way, predictable en masse, but not on an individual level.

David: For years and years, nobody realized this. What Amazon is building up on this side of the business is an enormous, if not the largest part of their moat. Today, Amazon has 185 fulfillment centers around the world. They have 96 airplanes on their own airline. They have a maritime company. They have 200,000 delivery vans. They've got another 100,000 electric delivery vans on order.

Ben: The company employs 1.6 million people, most of which do this.

David: Yes. Here's the moat. From the viewpoint of the customer, all that is free. Jeff obviously wasn't envisioning that specifically, but this is why they're going to beat Barnes & Noble, and this is why they're going to beat eBay, and this is eventually why they're going to beat Walmart in ecommerce.

Ben: Yeah. Tell us about eBay. If you were to pitch me on both of these businesses, put on my venture capitalist hat, and you told me that I can take this really asset-heavy inventory business with an unbelievable amount of capex that needs to be built out with all these fulfillment centers with Amazon, or I could run the high gross margin asset light business of eBay, 99 times out of 100 I want to invest in eBay. But Amazon dominated eBay, so how'd that play out?

David: The competition with eBay, the Barnes & Noble thing. Yeah, that was the first battle that Amazon wins, but it was obvious they were going to win that. eBay was like, this is a real fight.

At first, they're different. eBay is auctions, it's Beanie Babies, it's Pez dispensers, which by the way, that whole legend of Pierre started eBay so his wife could collect Pez dispensers. A PR person made that to humanize the story. That's not what happened.

Ben: AuctionWeb, not eBay.

David: As all this is happening, you mentioned the MBAs. Jeff and Amazon start hiring Andy Jassy, Jason Kilar, Victoria Pickett, Harrison Miller, Jeff Blackburn and blah-blah- blah. All these people who are coming in, all these MBAs, they're all tasked with adding a new category to Amazon.

Music and CDs, that's what Jassy does. Kilar does DVDs, Victoria does boxed software, Harrison Miller does toys, Chris Payne does electronics, Jeff Blackburn leads BD and starts buying all these other internet companies. Pretty quickly, Amazon and eBay are competing much more head to head than people originally thought.

eBay started as AuctionWeb in 1995 by Pierre Omidyar. It didn't turn into a real venture-backed company and changed its name to eBay until 1997 after Amazon was already public. Of course, famously, Benchmark invests $6.7 million in eBay in the fall of 1997.

Ben: Producing one of the greatest venture investments of all time.

David: That was fall of 1997. I think they own 25% or something, a fair assumption. We'll go tell that whole history soon. eBay goes public in September of 1998 at a $2 billion market cap.

Ben: eBay was the winner. At this point in time, everyone just looked at it and it was like, oh, that's the best dot-com business. Also, think about that. Series A in 1997 raising $7 million, $2 billion market cap IPO in 1998. Come on. I remember thinking how insane it was when Snap went public after what was it, four years?

David: Four years, yeah.

Ben: This was an all time insane moment with eBay going public and mania at an all time high.

David: There are legendary stories of administrative assistants at Benchmark retiring.

Ben: The little piece of the carry of the one investment in...

David: The market cap didn't stop at $2 billion when eBay went public. By the next year, in 1999, they get a $25 billion market cap.

Ben: That's a big company by today's standards, and we have trillion dollar companies now.

David: And it's effectively four years from AuctionWeb, but it's two years from eBay. That's impressive. As all this is happening, in the summer of 1998, right before the eBay IPO, but as Amazon and eBay are more like, wait a minute, we're going in the same direction here, Meg Whitman and Pierre fly up to Seattle.

Ben: Meg Whitman of Disney strat planning fame.

David: Disney, high margin media company. Keep all this in mind. That's the DNA of Meg. They fly up to Seattle to meet with Bezos and Blackburn. Remember, Amazon's the public company at this point, eBay is still this little startup that raised the Series A from Benchmark. They're hot, but they're still startups.

Jeff and Jeff, take them on a tour of the Seattle Fulfillment Center. Pierre's such an engineer. He's like, oh, this is super cool, and then they sit down to meet. The two Jeff's make it maybe not quite like the Barnes & Noble dinner, but they make an oblique reference of, well, maybe Amazon should acquire you. Supposedly, according to Brad, they float a $600 million number if such a thing were to happen.

Meg and Pierre get back to Silicon Valley, and supposedly, according to Brad, Pierre's like, wow, that was really cool. Man, that fulfillment center. They're building something very differentiated. Maybe we should think about that.

Meg supposedly says, and I think this is from an interview with Pierre in the book, this is not a direct quote, I'm paraphrasing, Pierre, warehouses are not cool. We never want to operate warehouses. You know what is cool? High margin internet businesses, that's cool. You don't want to be mucking around with warehouses.

Ben: This is the very, very, very starkest illustration of, what's the best business model over the next few years, and what's the best business to be in long-term? The best business to be in long-term—period—is delighting your customers more than they ever imagined. The best business to be in—certainly for the next few years, maybe even the next decade if you’re eBay—is a high-margin true internet business.

But Bezos is thinking in decades. He's thinking, how are we possibly going to be the best place to buy something on the Internet a decade from now? Unless it's extremely reliable shipping times, very short shipping times, we have it in stock, they're buying it from a vendor that they trust, that is secure. All these things require us to either be the merchant or at least be the ones who fulfill it and keep it in a distribution center or a fulfillment center, so they're both right on different timeframes.

My favorite Bezos quote is, and this, I think, comes from that very first interview that I referenced earlier. I've watched every interview Bezos has given in prep for this, but that one has all the highlights in 3–4 minutes and he's still got hair. He says, "Long term, there is never any misalignment between customer interest and shareholder interest."

David: It's so true.

Ben: And that's such a dramatic statement, because I think a lot of people would argue with that, and he's thinking on an infinite timeframe.

David: What happens after this meeting with Megan Pierre (I think) really illustrates just how special Jeff and Amazon as a company are, because he makes a mental and emotional leap that I don't know many people could have made. He both believes everything you just said. I've read Made in America, I'm building out this advantage, it's going to be my moat, I'm going to delight customers, this is the way.

Ben: And desperately wants to beat eBay at auctions.

David: Desperately wants to be eBay, but he's like, and eBay is also right. This starts at journey, but Amazon today is that amazing, back-end distribution. Like we were just saying, you can get stuff from Amazon faster, better, and cheaper than just about anywhere else on the Internet.

Certainly, an aggregate of everything you can buy, Amazon is head and shoulders above anybody else. And you can buy from other people who are not amazon.com on Amazon, and that is all thanks to that meeting.

Ben: Yeah. This is again, Amazon having to run into a wall, back up, try it again. Obviously, they don't buy eBay. Obviously, they naturally do have to do the next thing, which is even though Amazon is focused on the customer, they're also focused on their competition.

David: Of course they are.

Ben: Jeff has all these quotes about how the customers, and I think this is in the 1998 letter, maybe the 1999 letter. "We believe that our customers are very loyal up until the moment that there is a better way for them to solve their problems than buying from us."

That's off the top of my head. It's not exact, but it's close. I think his realization is, okay, if eBay has grown really fast and there's a way to get something rarer, cheaper, or something, we have to be in business doing that, too. This is Amazon's first very expensive failed experiment with Amazon Auctions.

David: After the meeting, Jeff Bezos turns to Jeff Blackburn and was like, auctions could be the future, we're going to start a secret project to clone eBay within Amazon. It's almost like the Book Predator with Barnes & Noble, except they're actually competent.

Ben: It's not like we're going to learn from eBay and apply it to our business, go for a different segment than eBay or do auctions differently. We're going to go directly at eBay doing exactly what they're doing.

David: Yes. Now, it makes sense why this would be secret. It's also a secret because Scott Cook, the founder of Intuit, is on the board of both companies. Amazon starts working on Amazon Auctions, literally exact clone of eBay. Now, eBay did not have PayPal at this point in time. Paying on eBay was this huge source of friction and a huge advantage for Amazon. Amazon has your credit card, blah-blah-blah.

Amazon finds out that. Of course, Megan Pierre, they're not dumb at eBay. They know this is a problem. They're talking to startups about acquiring startups that could solve payments on eBay. This is summer of 1998. There's no PayPal yet.

Nfinity, the first kind of [...], they didn't even get started until the end of 1998, early 1999. ebay is talking to a startup called accept.com and wants to acquire them to handle payments on eBay. Bezos swoops in, and Amazon steals the deal and acquires accept.com, mostly so that eBay doesn't get it.

Ben: And they just went public. Amazon's got all this cash from that, so they're feeling themselves and feeling like they can do stuff like this.

David: Yeah, eBay can't do this yet. Amazon's got highly valued liquid stock, all this cash, blah-blah-blah. If that had gone otherwise, I don't know about PayPal. There's probably no PayPal. There might not be a PayPal Mafia.

Ben: Great point.

David: Silicon Valley totally turns on a knife point at this moment in time. March 1999, Amazon launches Amazon Auctions, clones eBay, competes with eBay. Shocker. If you haven't heard of Amazon Auctions, it's a flop.

Ben: Here's an interesting comment on it. Greg Linden writes on his blog. Again, this early engineer who worked on personalization, auctions, and a bunch of other stuff. "When the site launched, it was technically superior to eBay's faster, better search, and several new useful features. The inventory was reasonable, but not large."

This is one of those things where the flywheel is just already in motion, when you have the network effect of more buyers, attracting more sellers and more sellers attracting more buyers like eBay had, and they were a couple years ahead, it was just already in full swing. Even if you have a more technically superior interface...

David: And the advantage of traffic on amazon.com that they could send, it didn't matter. They didn't have the network effect.

Ben: Amazon wasn't really prioritizing it. When you go to a product detail page on Amazon, they had invented this pretty amazing thing that really pissed off all the booksellers, which was when you look at a product detail page, you could buy new and used. They're like the same book, so we'll put them both right there.

Of course, that pisses off the book publishers because they're like, wait, our whole thing is that you want to go buy the new book and you can't buy a used one right next to the new one, that they used books are in this other distribution channel. Amazon's like, we don't care. A customer can choose which they want from one singular unified product detail page, which, flash way forward to third-party sellers, it's the same thing today. You're competing as a third-party seller to be the one that gets the traffic from the product detail page when people click the Buy button. They weren't doing that with Amazon Auctions yet.

David: No, it was a separate tab, separate site.

Ben: auctions.amazon.com. It was not getting Amazon's traffic.

David: Yeah, it didn't have a network effect. Another reason, people like eBay. They just totally shrugged off Amazon as a competition. A beautiful business model.

Ben: Their market cap continued to go nuts.

David: Yup. Jeff acquired accept.com to keep it out of the hands of eBay, but they go start acquiring a lot of companies, a lot of startups in this era, partially, I think to keep them from eBay and other people partially, because I don't know, everybody was drunk back then?

Ben: They were investing in a bunch of them as hedges. They looked at pets.com and they thought, oh, we're not going to get into shipping dog food for a while. In fact, I think they had tried to ship some cat litter at the same shipping rates as everything else and it was super expensive. That's an example that's referred to very often by early Amazon employees as a failed distribution, totally mispricing thing.

David: But yeah, they sunk a bunch of money into pets.com, Cosmo.

Ben: I think they owned 40% of it or something at some point.

David: Totally. The craziest of all of these acquisitions just from the story is a company called Junglee.

Ben: Yes, which was referenced on the Walmart episode.

David: Indeed. We're not going to talk about what Junglee actually did. It was a comparison shopping site started by three Stanford computer science PhDs and a business guy from Netscape. What it was doesn't matter. That business guy from Netscape, his name was Ram Shriram. That might sound familiar to some folks.

Ben: But probably not to most people.

David: Amazon acquired this company for $150 million–$175 million, something like that. They're in Palo Alto, but Amazon's like, you can't work there anymore. We can't have a tax nexus in California. Remember, this is still in those days. You got to move up to Seattle.

The Junglee team was like, all right, you just gave us a bunch of money, okay, well move up to Seattle. They hate it. The acquisition doesn't work out. It's ill-conceived from the get-go. Within a few months, they all quit and they moved back to Palo Alto.

Ben: Which by the way, then they would go on to ultimately start the thing that would be acquired by Walmart, which became Walmart Labs, which became probably the second biggest reason that Walmart is a very real competitor in ecommerce now, second only to Jet and Marc Lore.

David: They're back in Palo Alto. Ram, the business guy from Netscape, I assume through his co-founders, the Stanford CS PhDs, he gets hooked up with two other Stanford computer science PhDs. Two guys named Larry Page and Sergey Brin. Junglee have gotten acquired, they made all this money, and Sergey and Larry were like, oh, we want to raise a little money for this thing that we're doing.

Ben: Also, how crazy is it that we're nearly three hours into the story of Amazon? Amazon's already public and we're talking about Larry and Sergey at Stanford before Google was founded.

David: Ram's like, sure, you guys seem promising. This whole BackRub, PageRank thing, I get it. It's got potential. Great. He invested the first $250,000 in Google, and he joins the board of Google.

A couple of months go by, about six months to be exact. Jeff and Ram stay in touch. Even though they left Amazon, they're friendly. Jeff hears about Google. He calls up Ram. He's like, hey, I'm going to come meet these guys. Ram's like, sure, come on down to Silicon Valley, I'll host you all at my house.

Ben: Was Jeff interested in search yet? Amazon got obsessed with search and that an A9-era of 2004. Do they have any seeds yet?

David: I think this leads to that.

Ben: Okay.

David: Jeff and Mackenzie flew down to Silicon Valley. They all went over to Ram's house. They have a big, nice breakfast, a lot of back-slapping, Ram, Larry, Sergey, Jeff, MacKenzie. After breakfast, Larry and Sergey leave. Jeff takes Ram aside and he's like, hey, I'm going to put some money in these guys, too. Ram was like, dude, the seed closed six months ago. Kleiner, Sequoia, they're circling about doing a Series A. Jeff's like, I don't care.

Ben: Jeff's like, I'm Jeff Bezos.

David: Yes, that means nothing to me. I want in and I want in on the same terms as you. Ram goes to bat for him. He convinces Larry and Sergey to take another $250,000 of Jeff and MacKenzie's personal money at the seed price.

Ben: Which was?

David: I couldn't figure out what it was. But the Series A that would happen shortly thereafter of Google famously split between John Doerr at Kleiner and Mike Moritz at Sequoia was at $100 million post money valuation, which was insane for the point in time.

Ben: Mike Moritz came in and told Doug Leone, as Doug told that on our interview with him, even after making this investment, he's looking at Google and goes, we've never paid so much for so little.

David: Yes. That episode with Doug.

Ben: Amazing.

David: What a highlight.

Ben: Okay, so that's not at $100 million. We can say, I'm going to guess somewhere $20 million, $25 million?

David: I don't know. Ram led this. My best guess is $10 million or maybe even lower post.

Ben: Seeding, Ram got 10X–20X from the Series A.

David: I think so. I don't know.

Ben: Ram and Jeff, we should say, and MacKenzie.

David: I think it is probably safe to say that Jeff and MacKenzie owned at least 1% of Google, probably even after dilution from the Series A, because they didn't raise another venture round.

Ben: That's right. Google went public just on that series A.

David: They did.

Ben: Google, one of the most immediately cash-generative businesses of all time.

David: Oh, my God. They'd walk in the woods before they found the paid search business model and all that, but oh, my God. He's been asked, he's never commented on whether or not he and MacKenzie sold their Google shares. They wouldn't have even had a chance to sell before the IPO. At a minimum, he held to the IPO, 1%+ of Google. They probably held longer than that, I don't know. That's how Jeff and Mackenzie got wealthy.

Ben: In 2004, Google IPO'd for $23 billion market cap. Their shares would have been worth $230 million at IPO, which was 18 years ago. Since then, over the last 18 years, Google has 65X'd from there.

David: That was me laughing there. But listeners, you should just imagine Jeff Bezos laughing there.

Ben: Even if Bezos wasn't selling any Amazon shares for a while, he had plenty of capital to work with for doing things like investing in crazy, cool...

David: Clocks, rocket companies, and...

Ben: Venture funds.

David: Yeah, Benchmark.

Ben: PSL.

David: Which also, I don't think it was the eBay fund. It couldn't have been the eBay fund. But yeah, then Bezos becomes a large personal investor in Benchmark. In the future, of course, the main backer of eBay. It's also incestuous.

Ben: Think about it this way, too. What if Jeff still owns a percent of Google whether Google Cloud wins or whether AWS wins?

David: Especially now that Jeff's just a board member of Amazon, Scott Cook was a board member of Amazon and eBay.

Ben: What does he own, 17% of Amazon today or something like that?

David: Something like that.

Ben: He's only 17X more incentivized for Amazon to win than Google won. We're making up numbers here. We're speculating quite a bit on what price he got in and everything. He got access because Amazon bought a company and then they all left, but he maintained the relationship. Life is long.

David: Amazing. I feel like there's a lesson there, and the lesson is investing Google.

Ben: I think, yeah. That's all I can take away, too.

David: Back to Amazon. Despite this unbelievable, bountiful windfall for Jeff and MacKenzie personally, things are pretty bad at Amazon at this point in time. The dot-com euphoria is starting to wane. Some cracks are starting to show. Barron's in spring of 1999 publishes the famous Amazon.bomb article.

Ben: Amazon.bomb. There were some analysts who were still very, very excited about Amazon at this time. A Morgan Stanley analyst with the name that some people will definitely know from her Kleiner Perkins days and now bond days, Mary Meeker, at the time just at Morgan Stanley as an analyst wrote right around IPO time that Amazon is the leading retailer merchandiser on the Internet.

She said, “The valuation gives us heartburn of gargantuan proportion.” But she did conclude, “We do not want to miss this one.” A lot of her career at this point would come from trading on the professional capital that came from being extremely right about Amazon, but that doesn't change the dot-com bubble starting to show cracks and then eventually pop.

David: She would be out in the cold here by herself, because the Amazon.bomb piece comes out. Amazon reports, I think, either Q2 or Q3 earnings in 1999. It's the same story, lots of revenue growth, hugely unprofitable.

We didn't say, Joy and then her successor, she worked super hard for three years, totally burned out. Her successor, Warren Jenson took over his CFO from Delta Airlines; it's where he came from. Joy first and then Warren too, they orchestrated raising about $2 billion in convertible debt on the debt markets, which totally saved Amazon's skin.

Ben: And was way more than they raised in the IPO.

David: Way more.

Ben: They only raised $55 million.

David: Yeah. Sometimes, people are like, oh, Amazon what a great example of capital light. They raised $10 million in venture, $55 million in their IPO, and built Amazon, like, no, no, no. There is another $2 billion and they used it. Amazon would have been Amazon.toast, had it not been for that.

In summer of 1999, the stock starts falling. The board gets pretty worried about the company, about Jeff. It's hard to remember this, but this happened. The board asks Jeff to bring in a COO to complement him. It's so painful to read this and go back that this happened. They bring in Bill Campbell, the coach, legendary Bill Campbell.

Ben: We should say he's legendary. Everyone speaks very highly of him. He was brought in to Twitter and then worked as a pseudo nefarious agent on behalf of the board to oust the CEO. You got to wonder what was going on here, too.

David: No, it's not just Twitter. Bill, I think, probably genuinely was amazing. The testimony of so many people to him, even people like Scott Cook, who came in and replace. It wasn't just Twitter. Apple with Steve Jobs, Google with Eric Schmidt, Intuit with Scott Cook.

Ben: It's amazing that the thing that he got reputation for was being a coach, when in fact, the thing that he really did repeatedly—

David: It was convinced the founders to move aside and bring in the adult supervision.

Ben: Yes.

David: There's a fact pattern here, for sure. It doesn't mean he probably wasn't amazing and didn't help all those companies, but the Amazon board brings him into Amazon and simultaneously asked Jeff to go find a COO. Supposedly, actually, a leading candidate for the job was Jamie Dimon, if you can believe that. Isn't that crazy?

Ben: What could have been?

David: They settle on Joe Galli, who had been an executive at Black & Decker. He had actually signed to go take an executive role at Pepsi running the Frito Lay division. What other COO transition to CEO of tech company came from Pepsi?

Ben:. John Sculley?

David: Yeah, it would be John Sculley. There's a Scully situation going on here at Amazon in 1999.

Ben: Bezos does take this seriously. He reorgs. He has everyone report to the Black & Decker guy, to Joe. He says, my only direct report is now Joe. At the same time, he's also like, you're COO, you're not CEO. Joe, under this impression, probably from talking to Bill Campbell—we don't know for sure, and probably from talking to other board members—I think I'm supposed to do CEO-type stuff.

David: And I think I'm supposed to be the CFO for a while and then...

Ben: Move into this role and do it my way. We're going to do it the way that we did it at Black & Decker and from the world where I came from. Amazon rejects this. Joe starts running Amazon, sort of. He starts trying to get people to start moving to his way of doing things in his style of leadership, by the way, while he's commuting back to the East Coast every single weekend rather than being on the ground in Seattle.

David: That wasn't the worst offense.

Ben: The Amazon executives just reject this like a bad organ transplant.

David: Everything you need to know about the culture clash here is that Joe was one of those old school executives, who, the way he did email was he had his secretary printed out and read it to him, and then he would tell her what to respond.

Actually, that sounds pretty awesome. I would love that. I would love to do that. I would do that all day long, or actually for as little time as possible, as in often as possible, as rarely as possible. But yeah, that's not gonna work running Amazon.

Ben: So Joe's out.

David: Yeah. He does, though, make one absolutely incredible, lasting contribution to Amazon, which is he was a key part of recruiting Jeff Wilke. Jeff and everybody was, too, but that absolves a lot of sense.

Ben: For listeners who are unfamiliar with Jeff Wilke, what did Jeff go on to do with the company?

David: Jeff basically inherited and then expanded Rick Dalzel's role. Then eventually, when Bezos started to step back and Jassy became CEO of AWS and Bezos was CEO of the whole company, Jassy's counterpart and CEO of Amazon retail was Jeff Wilke.

Ben: He's got a little bit of a legacy at Amazon, Joe does as he parts ways.

David: Yup. He would go back to the world he came from. He became CEO of the holding company that makes Hoover and Dirt Devil vacuums. I think he did very well there.

Ben: Probably sold a lot of them on Amazon over the years.

David: Probably sold a lot of them on Amazon. Yes, indeed.

Ben: All right. Amazon's woes, though, are real. They now have a big debt service to pay based on this big convertible bond offering. In 1999, they're still growing at what is honestly an insane pace. It's not the amount that they were growing before. I think they're about tripling revenue, which to be clear in 1999 is $600 million–$1.8 billion. It's unbelievably impressive.

Their stock price the previous year from 1998–1999 had 10X'd, so expectations are through the moon for this company. It's not just solid fundamentals that we're valuing it. The way people are valuing Amazon is, sure, there's no net income or GAAP profitability coming out today, but they're growing so fast. They appear to have category leadership. And if the Internet's really going to be the thing that we think it all is, I just want to own a piece. This is, of course, how bubbles happen, then bubbles, of course, pop.

David: Oh, my gosh. We wouldn't know anything about this in recent history, would we?

Ben: No, not at all. By 2001, it's becoming clear that they got to pull back. In 2001, they lay-off 1300 people. This is almost like, Amazon had been so dominant for so long today that it's hard to even think about the fact that I don't know how close to death they were. They weren't dominant, and that feels weird saying today, remembering a time where it wasn't always succeeding.

David: I think they were pretty close to death. After the whole Galli incident—let's call it an incident—and Jeff reaffirms, hey, I do want to be CEO here, I'm putting my hands back on the wheel. He changes the motto of the company from Get Big Fast to "Get Our House in Order." I think they also have t-shirts made of that.

Ben: That reminds me a lot of, what did Facebook change from? It was Move Fast and Break Things. It was like, Move Fast With a Stable Infrastructure or something like that.

David: That was so funny. Not quite the same. I don't know how related it was to the whole coach Campbell-Galli thing. Probably it was more just about the competitive dynamic. Shortly after that, I don't know which side initiated it. One side or the other or both came to Scott Cook and were like, dude, you can't be on both of these boards anymore. And tellingly, Scott chooses eBay.

He actually has a quote to Brad in The Everything Store. He says, "Up until that point, I had seen Jeff only at one speed, the go-go speed of growth at all costs. I had not seen him drive toward profitability and efficiency. Most execs, particularly first time CEOs who get good at one thing, can only dance what they know how to dance. Frankly, I didn't think he could do it." Everything about that is telling, but the whole world thinks the same thing, too. They don't think Amazon could do this.

Jeff, though, I think he always believed he could do this. He announced his internal company goal that he announced to the whole company, part of the Get Our House in Order mantra, that they will be profitable by the fourth quarter of 2001.

They started looking at any possible way to increase cash flow, and necessity being the mother of invention here. they started looking around like, okay, what do we have? What can we do? We've got a pretty good ecommerce website. A lot of people want to have ecommerce websites. What if we start going to other companies who want to have good ecommerce websites and we offer to sell them our website, our infrastructure?

Ben: Almost like being Shopify.

David: Yeah. This is like Shopify, not AWS.

Ben: And they did it in their ludicrously high touch manner. It's not like we're just going to open up our platform. This whole obsession with interfaces, platforms, and APIs that exists within Amazon today, hasn't really happened yet. They're like, who can we basically do weird one-off partnerships with to create some co-branded website for them using our technology and all of our people to sell the stuff that they have relationships with manufacturers on?

David: And customers and that we can then just get paid like a software fee for?

Ben: Yes.

David: They do this with Toys R Us, and then they do it with Borders.

Ben: I remember the Borders branded Amazon, it was really weird.

David: I remember this. I would get Borders gift cards, and you could put them into the Borders site. But because it was also the same back-end as Amazon, you could then use that on Amazon. I totally remember doing this, and it worked the other direction, too.

Ben: The clarity of vision on Amazon seems so clear in hindsight, but there are these weird things that happened along the way where you're like, oh, no, they were just in a corner and did something pretty antithetical to what the drumbeat of the culture and the strategy was. How is this strategic with everything that Bezos has been writing in his letters?

David: It wasn't, but they needed the money. They do it with Target. They literally ran Target's website for years, which ominously, they announced that deal on September 11th, 2001, so rough. They even go pitched the idea to Walmart to do the same thing with Walmart. Walmart was like, yeah, no, thanks, guys. No, nice try.

Here's the super fun part. Amazon is going around pitching all these other retailers. Let us take over for you, run your website, blah-blah-blah. eBay knows Amazon's in a tight spot. They probably heard about Galli, Campbell, and all this stuff. In the fall of 2000, Meg Whitman and Jeff Jordan fly up to Seattle and they pitch Bezos on the opposite idea.

eBay takes over the failed Amazon Auctions and all of third-party sellings, so it'd become zShops, which we'll talk about now on Amazon. Just like eBay, we know how to do this. You keep running amazon.com, the retail, and we'll do third-party selling for you with eBay technology. It was like, wow, oh, my gosh. Do you know the Michael Jordan meme of like, I took that personal?

Ben: Yes.

David: I think it's from The Last Dance. I think Jeff took that personal.

Ben: Yes, I agree.

David: Yes, I think he took that very personal. He calls a meeting. Remember, they're just trying to survive, get to profitability, generate cash flow. They're doing this crazy stuff with Target and Toys R Us.

Ben: At this point, they've got over $2 billion of debt on the balance sheet. I think it actually increased from 2000-2001 and 2001-2002. They're really just making the interest payments here and trying to reduce the debt load and produce some net income profitability, which still hasn't happened.

David: No.

Ben: It was intentional for the longest time, but now that they need to do it, they need to grow the muscle to do it.

David: Yes. Jeff calls an emergency meeting of, at this point, it was the S team. The senior leadership, it was the J team, the Jeff team. Then when Galli took over and everybody reported to Joe, then it became the S team, the senior team.

Ben: Which it stayed the S team.

David: Which it stayed. That seems more appropriate than the Jeff team. Anyway, he calls a weekend emergency S team meeting at his house to discuss third-party selling on Amazon. I said zShops, so auctions. I can't remember if that was still alive or not.

They had tried saying, okay, well maybe auctions don't make sense on Amazon, but we still want to allow other people to sell on Amazon. What if we just do fixed price, like a regular retail type listing? They started this thing called zShops. But again, it was a separate tab website. It wasn't right on the product page of amazon.com.

Ben: They weren't leveraging the strategic asset that they had, which was traffic and customer loyalty.

David: What they realized is one way to look at the real key thing—and I think this is very true today—that differentiates Amazon positively versus eBay and pretty much everywhere else selling on the Internet, is they have an authoritative product catalog. If you are on a product page for amazon.com, you know what that thing is that you're going to buy.

Ben: They invented anybody's ever used against the API. They have ASINs. It's a unique Amazon identifying number for a product that they have an authoritative catalog on everything they sell.

David: Anybody who's ever bought something on eBay, you don't really know what you're getting.

Ben: Right. It's almost like Amazon starting as a bookstore had the benefit of ISBN numbers. It's like they decided, we're going to create a proprietary ISBN system for the world for all products.

David: Yes. They came up with this crazy idea in this meeting. There's some backstory that leads to it, which is on the product pages, they had links to zShops listings, and that was the only thing that drove actual converting traffic now. What if we put listings from third-party sellers on our own product pages? That's what eBay wants to do. That's why eBay is interested in talking to us.

What if we just do that and completely revamp how we think about third-party selling on it? But honestly, everything about the product page, and we call it Amazon Marketplace. They launched this in a matter of months. In November of 2000, they launched Marketplace first with books. This is nuts.

People are pissed at Amazon. If you're a Category Manager at Amazon, your competition—and Brad writes about this—just went from being outside the walls of amazon.com, you just let all your competition inside your walls in the castle on your product page.

Ben: I don't know exactly how it works. I think it's more sophisticated than this. Basically, if some third-party seller is verifiably selling the same exact product and they're doing it for a cheaper price, then the buy button doesn't come from Amazon. The buy button or guys that are competing vendors, third-party seller's product, you as Category Manager, if you've got a number next to your name, that doesn't accrue to your number.

David: Nope. That goes to a totally different team within Amazon. Just like amazon.com originally, it turns out customers really like competition, paying lower prices, being able to buy more stuff, getting more selection. They launched it in November, even though it launched in the middle of Q4 in 2001.

Ben: Which is a no-no until this point. You basically don't launch anything going into the Christmas season. You're literally not allowed to push code up until this point in Amazon's history around that time.

David: It accounts for 15% of all customer orders on amazon.com Marketplace. Wild. Today, Marketplace is over 50%, so over half of everything that is sold on amazon.com is not sold by Amazon.

Ben: I remember the annual letter in 2018 when it eclipsed it. Jeff proudly proclaimed that third-party sellers are kicking our butt. We're very excited about that.

David: What a Jeff thing to say.

Ben: This was when founder leadership becomes really important. They have an immediate organizational design problem, where a whole bunch of people are incentivized and comped against their fiefdom. What you've just done is you've created a brand new business strategy that tells people that the greater good is more important than their fiefdom. In order to rearrange everyone without creating massive infighting and churn to march in this new strategic direction, it's pretty hard to do that as a non-founder.

David: I'm so in awe of Bezos doing this, because he almost just got ousted out of his company. He's on thin ice, the company is on thin ice.

Ben: And this could have blown up the company, too. This is a different business model.

David: All of the emotional incentive that I would imagine for somebody in this amount of pressure is the board, the shareholders, everything, and just be like, okay, I got to come back. I got to save. I can't rock the boat. We got to do a cost cut, blah- blah-blah. He's like, nope, we're going to make this radical shift in this dire moment.

You're totally right. Not only is this something only a founder can do. It's only something that a very special founder would have the confidence to do. Amazingly, it works. Jeff's crazy goal of the company is going to hit profitability Q4 of 2001 that he just plucked out of thin air when he came back after the Galli incident.

They do it. Marketplace is a big component of this. The website deals with Target and Toys R Us are a big component to this. In Q4 of 2001, they did $1.1 billion of revenue, $59 million of operating income, $35 million of pro forma adjusted net income excluding stock based comp and other non cash expenses, which Wall Street's like, yeah, blah-blah-blah.

They do $5 million of honest to God, you can touch it, taste it, take it home, put it in your bank account, GAAP net income for the fourth quarter of 2001. This is huge. They announced results, the stock jumps 25% in one day, which no other internet stocks are jumping up in that moment in time.

Ben: Right. People are licking their wounds after 2000 for three years, four years?

David: It was an amazing achievement.

Ben: Amazon had seen big jumps before, like the Henry Blodget thing during the dot-com era where it was trading below 100 and suddenly jumped to 250 or something. All at once, just on Henry Blodget saying, I think it's going to go to 400. They were no stranger to massive fluctuations in their stock price, but you're right. This is one bright spot in a multi-year dark period for tech.

David: This is post September 11th. This is like today in the stock market. A year ago, stocks jumped 25% in a day, great. This is like, everybody else are going down and we went up.

Ben: Yup. This is the start of where you start to see, oh, Amazon might become bigger than eBay. eBay basically doesn't have a thriving comeback in the post dot-com bubble burst.

David: No. It would be a long journey, but Amazon stock price tripled in 2007 while eBay's fell by over 50%. During that year for the first time since eBay is IPO, Amazon finally passes eBay in market cap. Today, eBay’s market cap...

Ben: It is large. They've done a nice job. It's $27 billion, even after the big drawdown that we've experienced. It's a little bit weird to look at that number, because it's got the divestiture of PayPal in it, had the acquisition and then divestiture of Skype. There are some wonkiness. Their post-2015 has been pretty good.

David: Yup. Still, I think we can declare Amazon the winner here in the long run.

Ben: Yes. I can't tell you the last time I bought something on eBay. God, I'm afraid to look at my Amazon total.

David: Okay. Few more stories we got to tell about this era of Amazon before we talk about another era of Amazon on the next episode. We talked about Google. As the years go by after the dot-com crash and...

Ben: Portals go away and the browse motion on the Internet becomes inefficient, because the Internet's freaking huge and growing really fast. It turns out, search is really important. Amazon's looking at Google, they're like, God, they've got an unbelievable business. It's a monopoly, the gross margins are incredible. Finding things on the Internet seems really important. We should get into that, too.

David: Yup. It's both an opportunity and a problem for us. We want to be the place where people find stuff to buy on the Internet. Honestly, I think this is drawing too broad of a brush, but I think Google killed eBay. The best way to search eBay is Google, it's not eBay.

Ben: The issue with Amazon for a while was the best way to search Amazon was Google.

David: Right. Jeff, of course, through his very direct connection to Google, he saw this problem certainly before eBay, before lots and lots of people. He has a quote on Google from the pretty early days of Amazon dealing with this. He says to folks at Amazon, "Treat Google like a mountain. You can climb the mountain, but you can't move it. You use them, but don't make them smarter, as in like, don't make them smarter about searching our product catalog."

For the first time, knowing what a strategic priority search is becoming on the Internet, and thus to Amazon, Amazon breaks down and starts a secret subsidiary in California, in Palo Alto. They do a whole bunch of legal gymnastics. They're like, oh, it's a separate subsidiary. It's not Amazon.

Ben: It doesn't generate any revenue.

David: But this is the beginning of the end. Eventually, after the financial crisis, a whole bunch of stuff happens. They have to just give in and say, great, we've got operations. We're charging tax everywhere.

Ben: I think it's a misunderstanding of Amazon to say they don't want to pay sales tax because they're being cheap. They view it as a competitive advantage, where shoppers will shop with them because the items can be 5%-10% less because there's no sales tax on them, again, because it's technically putting the onus on the consumer. They're like, well, corporate income tax is a whole separate thing.

David: This is about attracting customers.

Ben: We have our own methods of paying the smallest amount of that possible. But yeah, this is purely about beating competitors to get the customer spend.

David: 100% after I graduated from college, and I was living on my own for the first time with my own salary and expenses, a light bulb went off on my head one day. I was like, I'm going to buy everything on Amazon because I don't pay sales tax. Fortunately, I'm in a place where that doesn't matter to me now. It's the Walmart episode. If saving 5%–10% on your groceries, on your item, like, that matters a lot to a lot of people.

Ben: Totally.

David: Bezos, Amazon, they see Google. They start a subsidiary in Palo Alto and like, we can try and not make Google smarter and play defense here. We got to play offense, too, and we got to improve our own search capabilities. They started hiring search PhDs, leaders, at the subsidiary in Palo Alto that they call A9 short for algorithms, A plus nine letters, algorithms.

Like you said, at first, they're like, oh, we should start our own separate search engine and compete with Google. It turns out, there's a network effect in search as well, which is the more data you have on the more searches happening, the better searches you can return. That's a fool's errand. But there is actually one corner of the Internet where Amazon has better data on searches than Google, and that is searches that happen on amazon.com.

Ben: Yup. Because as much as Google can index all of Amazon's product detail pages, they don't have the data on what people are actually searching for on Amazon, the demand data, the intent data.

David: They don't see a conversion. Plus, there's the review system, which we haven't talked about. It was completely genius, huge to Amazon's success.

Ben: Did you know Shel wrote that over a weekend in 1996, the original review system?

David: I know, amazing.

Ben: One of the first things on amazon.com.

David: Of course, those signals from the review system, the star ratings, the sentiment of the reviews themselves, that becomes a really important factor in waiting search. Today, like, oh, my God, search on Amazon, like, why would you search for products anywhere else? They got Amazon's choice, you've got the rankings, you've got the filtering. It's way better.

This is the beginning of all that. Like we're saying, I think it's also the beginning of the end for eBay because as Google gets better, deep linking from Google into eBay becomes the best way to search the chaotic marketplace of eBay. eBay's paying the Google tax on all that, and Google's the strategic intermediary. Amazon is terrified of the same thing happening to them.

Ben: Meanwhile, over in Google Labs, I loved when Google was a smaller company. I think it was a labs tab and you could click on all these weird little experiments they were doing. It wasn't like Google X, Google moonshot stuff. It was like...

David: Useful stuff.

Ben: Where Google Images came out of, and Gmail, and those sort of things.

David: Maps.

Ben: Yeah. One of them was called Froogle. I think it was product search. I think it was what Google Shopping became.

David: Dude, Froogle, I may be speaking out of turn without researching the full history, but I used to use that all the time, again, as a broke post college student, not as an investment banker, but I was making $60,000 a year living in Manhattan. Money mattered. I believe Froogle was insanely popular. I think I morphed it and shut it down for antitrust concerns.

Ben: Oh, really?

David: It was my understanding. I think, actually, there was a lot of demand for that product.

Ben: Comparison shopping, I think, is ultimately what it was.

David: The other thing, and this is why just Amazon is so good, and we're going to spend a huge portion of the next episode talking about, it's not just that they make search on Amazon better and play defense against Google. They do that. They also play offense. At first, it was like, oh, we're going to make our own search engine, and that was a bad idea.

What is the business model of search? It's advertising. What do they realize? We can build an advertising business with search on Amazon. It's just absolutely brilliant.

Ben: Any web platform of sufficient scale can layer on for free a second business of advertising, because they just have the traffic and they can put stuff in front of people, and they can prioritize it however they see fit. I think Amazon's ad business—I haven't done the research yet for next episode—I think it's somewhere around $40 billion in revenue now.

David: It is a $30 billion revenue run rate. They don't break out the margins, but it's so jazz.

Ben: It's basically 100% margin business.

David: Yes.

Ben: You already have those customers, there are no customer acquisition costs. You don't have to pay anyone out any amount of that revenue for any reason. It's like a Facebook ad. It's the best gross margin business in history.

David: The other incredibly impactful thing that comes out of A9 and improving search on the amazon.com website, is one of the catalysts that pushes the company to transition from a monolith software architecture to independent microservices. That is amazing for Amazon playing defense, and that is also amazing for providing web services to other developers out there. You might be able to imagine that.

Ben: Are you leaving us there, David?

David: I would leave you there. I would leave you there, but this is a very special episode and a very special company. We've got Acoda.

Ben: Are we getting into hardware? Is that where we're going here?

David: I don't know. We've probably done it more than once. But in my mind, the canonical Acquired episode, Acoda is the PlayStation on the Sony episode.

Ben: Oh, yeah. Where you thought, wow, look at all those 70 years of history, it feels like we're done, and then actually, they create their most successful business unit.

David: Yes. Regardless of how good you and I did or didn't do on, just the story of Sony, is one of the most incredible of all time

Ben: Yes.

David: And then the PlayStation.

Ben: And then one engineer in a corner who barely has express written consent from management advice to go build something.

David: That story is AWS for Amazon. The story we're going to tell is not as impactful from a business standpoint, but the story is just as good. That's the story of the Kindle.

Ben: I'm actually quite curious what the business impact is. I think they don't break it out, but I'm curious if you did any analysis at all. What does Kindle allow them to do that they otherwise might have lost market leadership on or something like that?

David: I didn't do any financial analysis. As we'll talk about in the story, similar to the defense against Google with search, it was defense against Apple and the iPod, the iPhone, the iPad. Today, I love Kindle.

My Kindle is one of my favorite things in the whole world. It's amazing. But I think probably the way most people consume most content on Kindle is apps on other devices, so the Kindle story. This is one of those five people on the Internet and Silicon Valley.

Ben: Oh, I could not believe the people's names behind the original Kindle inception. All right, lay it on us.

David: When I found this out, I texted you. I was just like, oh, my God. Okay. I know you know because we talked about it. But listeners, I bet very few of you know who inspired the idea for Jeff and Amazon to pursue the Kindle.

Ben: Let's give a little bit of hint. When we say inspired, they started an independent company doing Kindle-like things, ereader things, before—

David: Building one of the first few readers.

Ben: Yes.

David: The first successful ereader.

Ben: But long before it would take off, it was not with E Ink, it was with a predecessor technology.

David: It was with LCD, which was a big problem.

Ben: With LCD. How else might you know them? They are the founders of something that their name is not associated with, but someone else's name is massively associated with.

David: They would take the money that they made from this company and roll it into another little company that they would then start after this in 2003 called Tesla Motors. That's right. Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning inspired Jeff Bezos and Amazon to build the Kindle.

Here's the story. In 1997, Martin and Marc were working in Silicon Valley. Napster was happening, the music industry was getting digitized and eviscerated, and bought all this stuff, mp3s, mp3 players. It was total upheaval. Lots of people—the two of them included—were like, it's only a matter of time until other media categories go through the same thing.

Video is going to take a while because bandwidth and file sizes of video is a lot. Broadband isn't a thing yet for most people, but books are really obvious. Smaller file sizes than mp3s, very easily digitizable, this should be a thing.

What's holding back the industry? Unlike mp3s where it's pretty good experience downloading them from Napster, playing them on your computer, mp3 players are becoming a thing, there's no equivalent of an mp3 player for a book. You don't want to read a book on your computer, you want to read a book on a book.

They looked around and they talked to a bunch of exploring technology and they're like, we can make the equivalent of an mp3 layer for a book, an ereader. They started a company, they called it Nouveau Media, and they made the Rocketbook. They made a prototype, but it's hardware. They need to bring it to market, they need capital, they need the largest of, just like their future hardware startup Tesla, the largest of a wealthy person who might want to see this happen.

Ben: Who do they call?

David: They fly up to Seattle and they meet with Jeff Bezos. This is in the bubble era. Bezos was really interested.

Ben: I think Amazon's public at this point.

David: Yes, Amazon had just gone public, Jeff totally gets it. He's like, but our business is selling books. We're an internet company. I see what's happening with Napster.

Ben: This has happened at some point in some way.

David: This is for sure happening at some point in some way. This is the first time I've seen this. I'm very interested. They negotiated for three weeks. They wanted Amazon to sell books. You need books to sell, ebooks. You need relationships with publishers, they want Amazon to become the store or A-store.

This is the sticking point, A-store for the Rocketbook. Bezos also wants to do it, but he's like, look. If we're going to do it, we want exclusivity. I don't want you going and doing the same deal with Barnes & Noble or anybody else.

Ben: Right. Why would we fund the development of this and all the customer acquisition for you if we're not going to be the exclusive provider?

David: Like any good entrepreneurs, when they hear this, they're like, all right, well, Martin and Mark, they fly to New York and they talked to the Riggio brothers. They're like, hey, we're talking to Jeff.

Ben: I love that these guys are back in the story.

David: I know, they're back in the story. Of course, Barnes & Noble wants to crush Amazon at this point. They're like, great, we'll do the deal with you. We don't need exclusivity, but we'll invest in the company. We'll bring Bertelsmann, the German media company in as well. You'll get your publisher relationships, you'll get your store, we'll do this, and we know Jeff won't do the deal.

Eventually Cisco invests as well. In 1999, the device launches to the public. It's too early, but Oprah makes it one of our 10 favorite things for the year. It's a hit. Ultimately, Gemstar-TV Guide, pretty quickly after, acquires the company for almost $200 million. Martin and Marc, they got pretty wealthy.

Ben: These guys are flushing with some cash.

David: That literally leads to Tesla. It's freaking crazy. Also just wild that if Amazon and Bezos hadn't acquired accept.com, probably no PayPal, which means Elon doesn't have the money, which means...

Ben: Interesting.

David: The tangled web here is amazing. Jeff and Eberhard remained friends through all this and just like, all right, no hard feelings. There are plenty of other stuff going on at Amazon. As the years progress, they stay in touch. Jeff is always asking Martin like, hey, when do you think the technology, we're thinking about this, when do you think it might be ready?

Apple and Steve Jobs, in 2001, they launched iTunes and the iPod. It's amazing, people love it. Okay, but it's Apple. Tiny market share, you have to have a Mac to use iTunes, to use the iPod. Great for students, but not changing the world here.

Ben: Yes, not the Apple we know of today.

David: In 2003—it was so fun going back and remembering this—they launched iTunes for Windows. That was such a huge moment for Apple, and Steve Jobs knew it. He totally freaking knew it.

Bezos and a couple of other folks went down to meet with Jobs after iTunes for Windows launches, because they're like, we sell a lot of CDs on Amazon. Jobs is like, yeah, you sell a lot of CDs on Amazon. Good luck with that.

By the way, we're not just thinking about CDs and music here. There's now a new threat to not just any business within Amazon, but the original core books is immediately what they're thinking about.

Ben: Which is still a huge part of their sales at this point. Or at least media, books, CDs, DVDs. That's a huge part of Amazon's business.

David: Totally. There's now some urgency in Amazon to deal with this, so Jeff calls Martin back up. They've already started Tesla at this point. He's like, yeah, we got to do this now. Martin's like, okay, well, the LCD screen that we used on the Rocketbook, it had a whole bunch of problems with it. I talked to these guys at the MIT Media Lab about this technology they were developing called E Ink. It wasn't quite ready yet, but you might want to go check them out and see if it's ready now.

Ben: In particular, the LCD uses too much battery, it's bright so it's not good for night reading necessarily. You can't really read in the sun.

David: What do you want to do with a book? You want to take it to the beach. You want to read it outside, you want to read it in bed, all these things that LCD screens, especially at the time, are not good for.

This is such a priority. This was after A9, so they already had the one subsidiary in Palo Alto. They set up a second subsidiary in Palo Alto called Lab126 with the secret mission of make an iPod-like ereader device.

Ben: It took them a while.

David: Years.

Ben: Two full years, and then they slip the release date by a full year. It was supposed to be out for one holiday season. It didn't come out until the next. But when it came out, it was earth-shattering.

Not only is it shocking that Amazon is doing hardware, because that is not a thing that they've ever done before, and that's not what we expect out of them, and there are only a few big successful companies that make consumer computing hardware, that sort of thing, but it really was the introduction of E Ink as a viable technology. People really hadn't seen it before in consumer devices.

David: Now we're going back and looking at photos of some of the sources of that original Kindle that launched. It took till 2007.

Ben: It had that keyboard on it.

David: Yeah, it had the keyboard. It had a wonky scroll wheel, because Bezos was like, I've got a scroll wheel on my Blackberry, and I want a scroll wheel on my Kindle.

Ben: Yeah. He was constantly fighting with the design firm that they had hired to produce it, and putting his own beliefs about how it should be, even though they're the designers. They would come back and they would have him put on the business model and he's like, you're going to take my design advice and you're definitely not giving me Jeff Bezos' business model advice.

David: That's the thing. The device nailed a couple things, E Ink, technology, actually wireless, which was a Bezos thing, because Wi-Fi still wasn't quite everywhere.

Ben: Whispersync, I think was the name of the...

David: Whispersync, yup.

Ben: Or Whispernet?

David: There were obviously things wrong with it, like the keyboard, the scroll wheel. But the device was good enough to have a book-like experience. Then on the business side, you can buy any book ever made for $10. Now it's just unbelievable. It completely changed the industry.

Ben: Gosh, there's too much to get into on this episode, but that would be the seed of massive amounts of unrest and lawsuits in the entire book publishing industry involving Amazon, Apple, all the big publishers, allegations of collusion. This was the thing that violently shook the book industry. Amazon did by launching and by aggregating so much of the power, but then the thing that really upended and truly disrupted the industry was this, we're launching at consumers at $10.

David: Which is funny. It wasn't piracy. It wasn't like the music industry. It was $10 for an e book. The Kindle itself, incredible story, but then that leads to Fire Tablets, Echos, the lady who lives in your Echo, Fire TV, Prime Video, Ring, Era, all this stuff, and freaking Audible.

Oh, my God. Right after the Kindle launch, Amazon buys audible for $300 million. Today, Audible has a 40%+ market share of audiobooks, which is a $5 billion industry growing 25% every year. I tweeted about this. This is going to be one of my most likes tweets ever. I cannot believe it. Audible would be a $10 billion company on its own, more? I don't know.

Ben: It's crazy. Yeah, you're right. In some ways, the on-its-own-thing is the caveat there, because so much of their demand comes from being on the product detail page of a book when you go to checkout and me having the trust and everything that comes guaranteed from using my Amazon account for it.

All right, that's audible. We've got Kindle, we've got Audible. There's a lot more to talk about here before we get into AWS. I really want to dig into Prime, but let's save that for playbook, because I feel like that's going to be a good place to hit what's going on there.

David: Great.

Ben: Before we transition to powers, playbook, and our analysis section, I want to thank our friends at NZS Capital.

David: Indeed.

Ben: This is a very unusual sponsor for us. This segment is brought to you by our friends at NZS Capital, Brinton, Brad, Joe, and John. We reached out to them initially to propose this idea of, hey, do you guys want to do a paid sponsorship? I thought it was a crazy thing to propose and they jumped on it.

For those of you who listened to the last episode, you know that they gave us one very large caveat. They said that the only thing we could ask listeners to do is read one white paper, think about it, and then offer feedback to further refine the thesis. We got a bunch of feedback from people that what NZS is observing here is really interesting. For people who are new to listening to this episode, we want to dive into that same topic again.

Many of you know them from the special episode we did last fall on complexity investing and semiconductors. But for those who don't know, they're a long, only global equity fund that manages money for institutional and accredited investors. They have over a half a billion dollars under management, and the team worked together for many years before starting NZS in 2019. They're among our very favorite thinkers on Acquired, and they are just some of the most genuine, down to earth, curious knowledge-seeking folks we know.

Today, we want to talk about the idea that really started NZS's investment philosophy 10 years ago, complexity investing. This grew out of research work on complexity by the famous Santa Fe Institute. The idea as applied to investing is that it is literally impossible to predict the future, which many try to do in investing, because every market and every company is a complex adaptive system.

This means that an investor simply cannot take in the vastness of inputs to accompany like their competitors, geopolitical changes, or new technology inventions like the Internet—hence complex—to consider how all of these inputs then interplay with each other and cause the system itself to change—hence adaptive—to predict the future with really any level of precision.

David: I feel like we could say this about any episode, but Amazon more than anything. We just told this first part of the history of Amazon and so many moments where if you had all of the inputs and you're looking at Amazon from the outside, you would call this company amazon.toast or amazon.bomb, but Jeff changed, the company changed. They adapted and here we are.

If you're willing to accept this as a fact that you can't predict the future as an investor or really anybody, then the question is, what should you do? NZS's thesis that they lay out in the paper, is that you should invest based on two dimensions, resilience, and optionality.

Resilience, meaning how resilient is a given company to varying degrees of change. Is it a company like Amazon that is able to withstand and thrive through even very large shocks to the operating environment like Covid, the dot-com crash, the financial crisis, or you name it? Or is it more like another great company, Tesla?

Specifically, in the early days of Tesla, that was a very highly path-dependent situation. Everything had to go right. If one thing changed or didn't go according to plan, Tesla or SpaceX wasn't going to make it.

Ben: Dot-toast.

David: Of course, that makes Tesla and SpaceX sound bad, but resilience is not alone enough to tell if something is a good investment. The other dimension you want to pay attention to is optionality. Obviously, early Tesla, early SpaceX, had huge optionality associated with them. By optionality, NZS means really very similar to venture capital and what we talked about so much on the show, asymmetric upside.

So many things could derail something that has high optionality, but if it goes right, is the upside worth the amount of risk that you're taking? Obviously, in the case of those examples we just mentioned, yes, was the answer.

One of the other key insights that NZS has is that these are not inversely correlated variables. Often they are, but you can also find companies, very rare companies, they call ROOTMOs—resilient with out-of-the-money optionality companies—that are both highly resilient and have optionality still associated with them. Those are obviously the very, very best types of companies to invest in.

If you're looking at a company you think as a ROOTMO, then you're investing in a resilient company, but you might get some skunkworks project that they're working on as optionality for "free" because it's not priced into the future value of all the cash flows from the current resilient business.

David: Like web services from the Internet's largest retailer in 2008 or 2009.

Ben: Something like that.

David: Something like that.

Ben: To close out the segment, if you're interested, you should check out the fascinating white paper from NZS, which has some killer diagrams in it, by clicking the link in the show notes. It is well worth reading. We say this literally just as fans of their ideas. We are not clients of NZS.

They really do want feedback on their ideas. You can, of course, email Brinton and Brad from their email addresses right there on the paper. Or even better, we are going to do a Zoom call with them to talk about these ideas together. There is a second link in the show notes to add that to your calendar very soon after this episode on Tuesday, August 16th, 2022, at 4:00 PM Pacific Time. We would love to see you there.

David: Indeed. Thank you, NZS.

Ben: All right. Our thanks to NZS. Now, back to Amazon.

David, let's talk about power. Of course, this is us referencing the Hamilton Helmer book, Seven Powers. The core idea is really investigating what it is that enables a business to achieve persistent differential returns or basically be more profitable than their closest competitor and do so sustainably.

The seven options, the seven powers that Hamilton identifies are counter positioning, scale economies, switching costs, network economies, process power, branding, and cornered resource. David, as I was preparing for this episode, again—I mentioned this earlier—I tried to watch literally every Jeff Bezos talk, especially from the early days. There's this amazing one that he gives at Stanford, at GSB, literally the week that Amazon Prime first launched.

David: Oh, so cool.

Ben: He's talking about it as this brand new thing. It's $79 a year. He's observing this really fascinating thing about the business, where he wants to transform customer experience from a variable cost into a fixed cost. He's describing what if you could shift all of that to a really, really big fixed cost, basically, to get operating leverage on it.

One example that he talks about is that they have this great feature, and everybody's experienced this, I'm sure. When you go to buy something on Amazon, there's a little banner that tells you, you already bought this if you already bought it.

While that may seem like it can diminish short term revenue, his view is it builds trust with the customer for the long term because you say, oh, thanks, Amazon, maybe I already have this in my house, or maybe there is a chance you wanted to buy the same thing and you just get that delightful customer experience, that reassurance that this is indeed the exact same ASIN or an Amazon identifier of a specific product that you are looking for.

He points out, this would cost us the exact same amount to build this thing that provides customer confidence whether we had a million customers or 70 million customers. What he's describing is the most perfect, vivid example of scale economies, where once they get all these customers and once they acquire them all to Prime so they are all loyal, subscribed, guaranteed-to-shop-here customers, then you can amortize every new investment in every new feature across a massive customer base.

How could anyone build as good of an experience as you can, because they have to fund it with revenue from fewer customers? I'm not saying that Amazon only has this as one of the powers that enables them to achieve persistent differential returns versus competitors, but Jeff was writing that part of the book as he was giving the speech. It just sent alarm bells off of my ears.

David: That's awesome. Maybe now actually is the right place to talk a little bit about Prime and this dynamic. Yes, so true. Now, as you say, Amazon isn't necessarily the only company that this is true for. You could say similar things of Walmart, especially now that they have Walmart+.

You could very certainly say the same thing of another one of our favorite companies that we have not covered on Acquired that we have to now after these first two episodes of the season. That would be Costco, Seattle Hometown Heroes.

You mentioned Prime. We skipped over this in history and facts, but I think let's talk about it a little bit here. Jim Senegal and Jeff are buds. They're tight, at least they were.

Ben: And at least Jeff credits a particular lunch with Jim from teaching him a lot of lessons. In particular, the one I think you're referencing, which is customer loyalty is the thing that matters. In particular, because as we all know, Jeff is absolutely laser-focused on not gross margin percentage, but the absolute dollar amount of margin dollars over a full customer lifetime, that you can get.

David: Which is a such a lesson from Costco. It was not a lunch. It was very famously a coffee in the Starbucks of the Bellevue Barnes & Noble, which Jeff will go to great lengths at any point in time to talk about how he was doing business meetings in the early Amazon days. Literally in his competitor’s coffee shops. Not that he's a competitor-focused or anything. No, definitely not.

This coffee where they meet for the first time, Jim from Costco is just like, ah, I've never met him, but he must just be such a mensch. He's old school. He's got the Sol Price DNA, worked for Sol Price, new Sam Walton. His whole thing, he talks about this later.

The reporter asked him. I don't think it was Brad, I think it was somebody else. You gave a lot of key information to Jeff Bezos, who you became friends with, and then he's certainly one of your biggest competitors. Jim's response is just like, this is retail, you shop your competitors. Sam did this, I did this, we all did this. We all shamelessly steal good ideas from each other. This is how it works.

Ben: Jim famously has said that some of his highest performing Costcos are across the parking lot from Sam's Clubs. He relishes competition.

David: Yeah. Actually, the purpose of the meeting was that Jeff wanted to pitch Jim. This was early days when they were expanding the categories on Amazon. There was a bunch of products that they couldn't get yet. They didn't have relationships with suppliers. Jeff wanted to pitch Jim on Costco selling on Amazon for the products that Amazon didn't carry yet. That didn't go too far.

Jim gives him this masterclass on the Costco model. It sounds insane if you're not familiar with it from the outside, but then it makes total sense if you realize you're focused on gross margin dollars over the life of a customer, not percentage. The Costco model is more complicated than this. But essentially, they make 0% operating margin on their retail operations. They sell at such a low price.

Ben: I think I looked into this when we were working on the Walmart episode, something like 5%–7% gross margin business.

David: I think it's a little higher than that, but is basically set such that that when you take out the cost of running both the back end logistics and the warehouses themselves, they are making no profits on the actual retail business. All of the profits of the company come from the memberships, the annual memberships.

Ben: The merchandise just needs to provide you enough value to then renew your membership for the next year.

David: Right. The beauty is, it perfectly plays on customer psychology. Ordinarily, you'd be like, why would anybody pay money for the right to shop? You can just walk into a Walmart, you don't have to pay Sam any money to shop there.

Once you've done that and you've made that sunk cost, if you then believe that you are going to get the lowest prices absolutely anywhere as a result of having that membership, you get this insane combination of the sunk costs effect plus the endowment effect, and you become crazy loyal. You're like, I have paid the money for this membership, I need to get the return on the membership, and I feel like I'm part of this club. I have this guarantee that I'm going to get this benefit that nobody else who aren't members gets. I'm now going to do all of my shopping at Costco.

Ben: Yeah, it's pretty amazing.

David: You get these loyal customers that stay with you for a long time, spend tons of money, not that you're making profit on that money, but that then helps drive the scale to get prices even lower. It also means you don't have to advertise. Costco does basically no traditional advertising because it's all word of mouth, because the customers are so insanely loyal about their memberships.

Ben: Yup. What Jeff Bezos chose to do here was a little bit different, because I don't think he's running a breakeven retail business and just making money on Prime. I think he realized one of the effects you were talking about, which is, once you've made your deposit, your $79 a year to Prime, you're going to keep shopping on Amazon. He almost flipped it and he's like, oh, I want to use that same psychology, but I don't need to make $0 running the business and make everything on Prime.

Part of the reason he had this perspective that he could make money in both ways, was because the way that prime came about was actually the legacy of a couple of other shipping programs they had tried.

David: Supersaver, right?

Ben: Exactly. If you spent enough, then you'd get free shipping. Or if you were willing to wait for your goods for a while and get them batched up, you could get free shipping. This idea was really somebody inside the company pitching.

David: Who was an engineer named Charlie Ward, I believe, submitted it as an idea.

Ben: He's thinking about we're getting better and better at fulfillment. What would we need to charge customers in order to guarantee two-day shipping on everything they ordered basically no matter what? Really lean into that convenience part of the retail holy trinity of price, convenience, and selection.

It was this really interesting dual collision path of, okay, how much do we have to charge people in order to give them two-day shipping? And then this Jeff realization from Jim Senegal at Costco of, wait a minute, if we charge people anything, they'll actually be more loyal, which is the ultimate thing that we care about.

David: Totally. Again, demonstrates Jeff and everybody at Amazon thinking through like, what is the nature of their business? What is the nature of ecommerce? In physical commerce, those dimensions of the holy trinity or at least maybe the aspects of what matter of the retail holy trinity, are different.

Convenience is different in physical. It's a little less convenient to shop at Costco versus Walmart of, maybe you got to reach up higher on the warehouse shelves, but it's not really that different. Whereas shopping online, getting your stuff in two days, next day, or same day, that's a big difference than getting your stuff two weeks from now. That's a really important difference.

Ben: Totally. All that said, even though we're saying, hey, Amazon is not fully saying we just want to make a bunch of money on Prime, I think they do make over $20 billion in revenue per year on just Prime subscriptions.

David: Wow.

Ben: I'm pretty sure they lose money on just Prime if I'm thinking about my own habit. For the amount of stuff that I ordered from Amazon, if I actually had to pay shipping, would I be paying more than $129 in shipping? Absolutely. What about all that stuff that I watch on Prime Video? Absolutely. There's definitely an element to it, where you're like, wow, yeah, it's worth over $20 billion to them in revenue, but I'd be fascinated to see the internal Amazon accounting on how they choose to justify the cost.

David: That $20 billion, whether they're making any actual profits out of that or not—debatable—this is where this ties so tightly into the Amazon flywheel, which is another key piece we didn't discuss in history and facts. They do a management off site in 2001 with Jim Collins, author of Good to Great, where he writes about the flywheel. It's actually before Good to Great came out.

Ben: Didn't they get a little preview of it?

David: Yeah, a little preview. Because of Prime, and this guarantee to all these people who signed up for Prime that you're going to get a two-day shipping, that upfront funds, Amazon's investment, in better distribution and logistics, everything we talked about on the whole episode.

The more capital that they get to fund that and the more customers they get that are using that, the more leverage they get, and the better they can perform in Optimizely. Nobody else has their own airline with 96 planes. Walmart doesn't have their own airline with 96 planes.

Ben: They have more predictability, they have more loyalty, so they have longer customer lifetimes, so they have more absolute margin dollars from purchases coming in. A thing we haven't talked about, which is another just amazing insight, is the cash flow dynamic of this.

Amazon charges me $129 at the beginning of the year before I make any purchases on their website, and they get to do stuff with that cash. It is an incredible form of float on top of many other forms of float that they have going on in their business.

David: Just to complete the flywheel, Amazon through having all of this leverage that we just talked about in their operation, this operating leverage, float, and all these wonderful things, they can work on charging even lower prices providing even more vendor selection and even better convenience. All three on the holy trinity, they get better at that.

That attracts more customers, more customers then attract more sellers and suppliers on the platform. That allows Amazon to get more operating leverage, and then the cycle just repeats itself over, and over, and over, then drives itself around many, many, many times a year.

I could be wrong on this. I believe Amazon's inventory turns per year are something like 16 or something insanely high. Probably not as high like a Costco, but for the complexity of Amazon's operations and the breadth of items that are sold in the store to get that kind of inventory.

Ben: And that's just the first party. Fifty-seven percent of Amazon sales right now are from third-party sellers, where Amazon's just collecting margin dollars and holding no inventory.

David: Yes, scale economies. They got that one.

Ben: Absolutely.

David: I don't think that's the only one that they have.

Ben: No.

David: I think they definitely have brand. No doubt in my mind that they have brand. The definition of brand power is you would buy a commodity at a higher price from brand with power over a brand that doesn't have power.

Ben: I absolutely do this.

David: 100%. Amazon exploits this. This is part of the legacy of search and all the algorithms in the company. Very smart pricing and dynamic pricing on the website. I'm sure I could buy stuff cheaper, most things, and then I'd get them on Amazon. But I don't even look, because I'd have to wait two weeks, I'd have to go find it, or I wouldn't have the smooth customer experience. Of course, I'm just going to go to Amazon.

Ben: For a while, I remember my development over the course of being an Amazon customer here. So think 2008–2012 timeframe when I was in college. I would comparison shop for sure. Amazon versus everything else. I would do that and I would do that. Amazon would win so consistently, because they do the Walmart thing, where they would go out and scrape every other site, create a bot, and make sure that they can be the lowest price anywhere of any reputable retailer.

Enough times that happened where I got conditioned to just stop looking, because they were the lowest price anywhere. I think about five more years went by. Whenever I would comparison shop, if I really spent 10 or 15 minutes, I could always find somewhere selling it cheaper, but something was worse, to your point.

I didn't recognize the brand name of the seller, so there's a branding power there that's very clearly being demonstrated, or the shipping, or I wouldn't be confident that I could return it, or there are just all these little things about Amazon.

Then it became this interesting, explicit choice where I now know, I probably could find this somewhere else cheaper, and I still don't comparison shop. That is an incredible, incredible brand power that they've built.

David: There's then a third hop of, I don't even comparison shop anymore because it's not worth my time to do that.

Ben: Right, because I know that I'm gonna find something potentially marginally cheaper and still not pull the trigger.

David: Again, this is the difference versus when we were broke post college students. What are you going to save? On stuff, are you going to save $10? You're going to spend half an hour to save $10. For a lot of people, that makes a lot of sense.

Ben: And then have potential headache. One out of every 10 things that I buy in that way from a merchant that is not Amazon, I will have some headache with. Therefore, if you probability adjust the amount of dollars that I'm saving in terms of potential time cost later in headache, it's just not worth it.

David: Totally, especially I got a baby now. I ain't got time for that. Hell no. Amazon.

Ben: That's scale economies, that's branding.

David: Network effect, for sure, at this point. Originally, Amazon didn't, because Jeff Bezos took it personal.

Ben: With third-party sellers, you're talking about?

David: With third-party sellers.

Ben: Yes. With marketplace, absolutely. More customers drives it being more attractive for the sellers to come on, which attracts more customers. There's that network economies. Interestingly, there are no supply to supply side or demand to demand side network economies.

David: Yeah, I think that's right.

Ben: The fact that you're an Amazon customer and Amazon customer, I don't care. I don't benefit from that at all. It's interesting, they've never really leaned into that at all.

David: Yeah, it's interesting. This is scale economies. I was going to say maybe a little bit on the seller side, because more scale for Amazon lets them do Fulfillment by Amazon, but that's scale economies. That's not network effects. But definitely, that's two-sided network effects.

You see that power with, just run a couple Google searches and lots of Amazon sellers are unhappy with Amazon. It got too much leverage, there's competition, blah-blah-blah. They'd go do their first party brands. They don't leave. Why don't they leave? Because you need that Amazon sales juice. Where else are you going to sell that much online?

Ben: Absolutely.

David: Do we think they have any others?

Ben: Maybe some lightweight process power. Process power is always so hard to actually put your finger on that I hesitate to name it here.

David: Switching costs, not really. I can buy this stuff on walmart.com. We're not talking about AWS here, we're talking about Amazon retail.

Ben: There's counter positioning in the era that we're talking about Barnes & Noble and subsequently, Walmart, because those folks would have to invest so much and did. Walmart did, at least, to completely reinvent the way that they do distribution and all their distribution centers to be fulfillment centers, and actually go directly to consumers by not letting people shop in big stores, and not having to have infrastructure for that. Amazon counter-positioned against everyone whose cost structure was set up to do that.

David: We talked at the end of the Walmart episode about how Walmart is currently closing down Sam's Clubs and turning them into online walmart.com fulfillment centers. That tells you everything you need to know right there.

Ben: Absolutely.

David: Certainly, counter position versus Barnes & Noble, the Brad Stone quote we read earlier in the episode of, "Barnes & Noble wasn't going to go all in on this because their distribution network was not tuned for ecommerce. They would have had to redo it." To do that, they would have had to majorly prioritize it within the company, put all their best executives on it, it be less profitable for them. They would lose money in the short run versus the hugely profitable stores. All the incentives were not to do it.

Ben: Absolutely.

David: Today, you can say they still have counter positioning.

Ben: No, that was just a take-off phase thing. I have been just frothing at the mouth to do playbook on this one.

David: All right, let's get into it.

Ben: All right. I want to open with a quote from the very first 1997 letter to shareholders, which I always think is fascinating. This is such a ubiquitous letter at this point that if you google in incognito mode, 1997 letter, this letter from Jeff Bezos comes up.

David: Also, we got to do a shout out to our friend and longtime Acquired community member, Preet Anand, who absolutely made a podcast feed reading the shareholder letters.

Ben: You're taking the words right out of my mouth. Thank you, Preet. I listened to him while I was doing some work in the yard yesterday.

The quote is, and there are many great quotes in here that really highlight the idea that you get the shareholders that you ask for, "When forced to choose between optimizing the appearance of our GAAP accounting and maximizing the present value of future cash flows, we'll take the cash flows." I thought this line by Joy Covey and Jeff is so incredibly prescient that he really is focused on the absolute dollars of free cash flow metric.

I think there's this misconception that people have about Amazon, that they're trading off growth for margin percentage. I don't think that's ever actually what was happening. People often look at startups today and they're like, profitability or growth? I think the way that Jeff always thought about it was, well, we care about free cash flow in the long run.

David: Right, in the long run.

Ben: That is the way that every business is measured. The keywords here are maximizing the present value of future cash flows, which necessitates building a brand around your stock, which I think Elon is the king of today. When you're talking about the present value of future cash flows, since future cash flows are unknown, you do have to build religion around your company today if your goal is to really get investors on board with your long, long, long term vision.

Amazon got thrown in with all these other dot-com companies when you read that Barron's article, Amazon.bomb. A lot of those companies, cosmo.com, for no shipping, you could order a pack of gum to be delivered to your house and it would arrive in an hour. You're like, clearly, they're losing money on this, and I'm not necessarily a loyal subscriber to this. Amazon always was gross margin profitable. They always had solid unit economics, but they would choose to super aggressively reinvest in something.

As we were preparing for this episode among the number of people we pinned in addition to Brad Stone and some of the other folks that we were chatting with were early, early Amazon or around the company, we reached out to a friend of the show, Michael Mauboussin, to see if he had any materials from this time. He's had more than a spidey sense that he would have strong opinions about Amazon at this time.

David: Our episode with Michael, I think it's the seventh most listened to Acquired episode of all time.

Ben: Yes, it's very widely listened to.

David: Which is amazing.

Ben: He's your favorite investor's favorite investor. He's the ultimate finance professor.

David: If you haven't listened to that, go listen to it.

Ben: Yes. He made this presentation at Amazon in 1999, really advocating for exactly the strategy that they were running and just starting to articulate it and put it into a framework form, we have the deck here. One really fascinating observation he makes is that it's really about the weighted average cost of capital, the WACC. You don't need to be a finance professor like Michael to understand this.

Here's how it works. Suppose you want to invest in building a new distribution center so you can either expand the reach of shipping goods and say a new country or decrease the ship time for existing customers. This is Bezos' insight of, how do I turn customer experience into a fixed cost?

Let's say you have no cash in your bank account, you have to raise capital. Either you can sell part of your company with an equity financing like their IPO to get it or you could raise debt and pay some percent of interest, say 10% a year.

David: Which they did.

Ben: Which they did that, too, to the tune of close to $2 billion. That capital has a cost to it. The investments that you make in this distribution center need to outrun your costs to obtain that capital for it to be profitable. But let's say you have a pile of cash in your bank account that you've got as profits from selling goods, that cash is effectively free for you to use.

If you have a competitor who's financing the growth with debt and you can do it purely with those profit dollars, you can beat them in the long term. Even better—and we'll put the slide up on the video format here for Michael's presentation—if you have all the dollars from selling goods, not just the margin dollars, and you don't have to pay your suppliers for like a month after the customer bought it from you...

David: Or two months, or three months, or four months...

Ben: Yes, you can invest heavily into this new distribution center with many, many more dollars, not just the margin dollars. As long as you're confident that that growth will continue and you'll have even more cash on hand at the date that you need to pay the supplier for the thing that you sold months ago that you now owe them for, that works really well.

David: Yes. Oh, boy. Ben, you're saying it's almost like another large operation we may or may not have talked about for 10 hours on Acquired, where they write insurance premiums and reinsurance premiums. They write the policies and they get those premiums from those policies in, and then they don't have to pay the money out until a disaster actually happens. They get to use all that money in between. You're saying it's like float.

Ben: Yes. Amazon today is a $1.5 trillion company that has not raised any material capital since that debt offering that they paid off in 2004 or 2005-ish. They are financing the business entirely with float until, of course, we'll get to AWS, and now they can actually finance it a lot more with just straight up operating income.

David: Actually, that, we should say. I think strictly speaking, that is not a true statement. They have been issuing debt, but I think that is not for financing the business. I think it's like a treasury capital management.

Ben: Okay. All right, fine.

David: It's not like the debt they issued in the early days.

Ben: Yes, very much not. As you can see in putting this slide up, Michael cheekily calls amazon.com cashflow.com, as if it's really pioneering this new model, where in the old school businesses, something would enter your inventory, you'd pay the supplier three months after it enters your inventory, and then it has to sit on your shelf for a while. Finally, a customer buys your book, and then the payment ends up being received.

They're a few months between when you have to pay your supplier and when you get paid, whereas what Amazon's doing is completely flipping on the head. The book can enter your inventory, the customer buys the book, you then receive their payment pretty soon after that or immediately after that, just after some credit card days, and then you can have a month or two before you need to pay your supplier. The internet business model and ecommerce totally flips it on its head because of the completely different way that the distribution works and that inventory works.

David: Yup. Even further adds depth of understanding to this point of the larger the scale of Amazon's operations in the flywheel, the more capital dollars, cashflow dollars, that they're able to get out of it to continue to fund building out the larger scale of their operations.

Ben: It's this killer insight, that cost of capital and having a negative cash conversion cycle, are directly related or I suppose, inversely related.

David: Yeah, think about it. Yeah, capital as a cost, but here, they're getting paid to use the capital that has a negative cost. It's amazing.

Ben: That's where Prime is really this on steroids.

David: Yes.

Ben: I'm paying Amazon $129 at the beginning of the year and asking for zero in return. In fact, I'm giving them my loyalty in addition to paying them and they're going to do interesting stuff with my cash in the meantime, is really genius.

David: All right, what else do you have?

Ben: Another one is from another early Bezos interview that I was watching, where he had to do a lot of fighting of stock analysts in the early days who were saying, yeah, lipstick on a pig, you're just a retailer. I don't understand how your cost structure is really any different. Sure, you sell it on the Internet, but you're just a razor-thin retailer. Why is this an interesting business?

David: What's the line that people always say, whenever Wall Street becomes disillusioned with Amazon, they say it's a charity being run for the benefit of the American consumer?

Ben: Yes. A lot of people are laughing all the way to the bank on the other side of that bet. He makes this great point, which is, okay, let's say we are just a retailer with a retail business model. There are a few things that are pretty different. A gigantic cost in the retailing business is your rent. If you are in a retail space—it's funny when he's saying this—it's much less expensive than it is now in a Prime place in a city. He cites, it could be like $7 a foot for a great retail space.

David: Oh, you're killing me. I'm thinking about San Francisco real estate.

Ben: Whereas if you're running a warehouse, somewhere where it really makes sense for us to have a distribution center, it's like 30¢ a foot, which is such a valuable point. Stores have to store all of their inventory or a lot of their inventory in very expensive real estate. Amazon totally does not.

David: Man, that is such a good point. That's such a good point.

Ben: I'd actually ever heard this argument before doing this research.

David: That's a fantastic point. Even Walmart, where Walmart stores are not in multi hundred dollar a square foot primo urban real estate, it's still a higher cost of real estate than where Amazon fulfillment centers are.

Ben: Absolutely. It's one of these things where it was interesting reading all the bear cases on Amazon. There are plenty of little quips where it would be fun to tweet them out and be like, this person was so freaking wrong, but a lot of the criticisms were reasonable. This particular one isn't reasonable, the one that we just pushed back on with the cost per square foot.

There's another one that wasn't really reasonable, which was this is a money losing business just like all the other dot-coms, because they actually were profitable if they weren't continuing to reinvest in growth, which would give them this unbelievably durable moat around consumer experience.

The one that is always an interesting thought experiment to me is people would ask, what do you own when you own a share of Amazon? Because much like a lot of stocks over the last couple of years, the price in 1998–1999 was completely disconnected from the reality of the underlying fundamentals.

You had a business that was growing massively, that was generating no GAAP income, and was doing things like reinvesting the float 100% of the revenue dollars they were getting in, so they needed to keep growing in order to ever pay their suppliers back. If the music ever stopped and they didn't keep growing, this isn't just magical, free money with no cost. The cost is if the party ends, you're screwed.

David: It's musical chairs.

Ben: Yes. The reason why Amazon wasn't totally screwed is because they were right in their bet that this was a gigantic market that they could basically grow into forever. Sure, they had a couple of tough years and had to raise some debt capital to get through it, but the naysayers were right if it wasn't a crazy high growth business for three decades. It just so happened that Jeff was right about that.

David: Are you saying he was right about it being day one for the Internet?

Ben: I am saying that if it wasn't day one for the Internet, it would have been a Ponzi scheme. Let me put a finer point on that. It would have been like me going and opening up a credit card to pay off other credit cards that I owe debt on. That is the type of thing we were talking about with the float situation.

David: This is a little bit of a sidebar here. Through the probably two months at this point since we decided we were going to do this episode that we've been researching, I just had in the back of my mind. I'm like, I wouldn't have even thought about this a couple years ago, but magic of compounding acquired. Here we are.

If by some miracle at some point, we get to interview Jeff, I think that's the biggest question I want to ask him. You stepped back? Forget Amazon, let's just talking about the Internet. What coach Campbell thought you might want to do in 1999, 2000 of step back, pursue your other interests, you decided no, wait, it's still day one here. Is it still day one now?

Ben: That is a phenomenal, phenomenal question. Okay. To your point on that, is it still day one for the Internet? I love this question in particular.

Here is a quote from the 1999 letter to shareholders. The thing to note here is he's justifying why they're investing so much money in technology to reduce costs, like just keeps reinvesting, pocketing money back in. He ends with, "We still believe that some 15% of retail commerce may ultimately move online."

David: Who may? Ultimately.

Ben: Guess what ecommerce penetration is right now.

David: Fifteen percent?

Ben: Fifteen percent. It went from 12% to 17% during Covid, and is falling a little bit right now, and is hovering right around 15%. If what he says is we believe that it may move online to the tune of 15%, maybe it's no longer day one for the Internet.

David: It's a good question.

Ben: It's certainly not day one for ecommerce.

David: I personally am definitely not ready to say it's day two, but I'm just very curious. What does Jeff genuinely think?

Ben: These things are so object a definition, too. How many days is it out of? Is this an innings situation? Is this a 365 days? Is it God created the earth in seven days situation, or is it out of seven? What's the denominator?

The other thing that I keep thinking about is, how could I possibly spend more money online? I'm not sure more of my spend or my time could move on the Internet. Internet penetration got to be in the 90%+ in America and getting up there for the rest of the world, too. If you just look at, we're running out of hours in a day and we're running at a household spend to spend on things you could buy over the Internet, so…

David: I think, really, this is the question harking back to what we talked about towards the beginning of the episode. You and I have, fortunately, in our lifetimes when we were kids. But in our professional careers, we have never experienced anything like 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, where traffic on the Internet was growing 230,000% a year. We've never experienced that. We're benefiting from the aftershocks of that still.

I think that's the question. Where are we in the aftershocks of that? Or is there going to be another event like that in our lifetime? I think everything in our time that we've thought of as that is mobile, cloud, Web3, VR, it's all still just the Internet. Those are aftershocks. That's not the event.

Ben: Going back to this credit card game, Ponzi, or Peter to pay Paul, this mental model of borrowing against something in the future like paying your suppliers in order to do interesting things with the dollars today, I think giving that a little bit more thought since I threw it out, I think the reason why it all worked out is that the Internet ultimately provided a ton of consumer value on an ongoing basis, even when the bubble burst.

If you look at traffic during 2000, 2001, 2002, people kept adopting the Internet. These tech stocks, equity investors ran away from backing them, because people got so ahead of their skis investing on clicks and not even revenue like clicks and eyeballs, let alone gross margin dollars, and hopefully, eventually free cash flow.

The fact of the matter is, even though investors got scared, it provided an incredible amount of consumer value. The fact that people kept doing it meant that Amazon kept growing their customer base, the customer loyalty, and the number of transactions. There was a there there. They could survive the bubble because ultimately, more consumers kept getting more value so the party could keep going over at cashflow.com.

David: Yes. It's interesting. I'm thinking back on my personal experience living during that time. I'm curious for you. Did you have any awareness of the tech bubble and or the tech bubble burst?

Ben: No. I was 10 in 1999. I remember September 11th, but I don't remember that it came after a bubble bursting.

David: Right, but you probably remember your experience of the Internet and it growing in your life, right?

Ben: For sure. It sort of grew with me growing up. I remember like, oh, now I'm old enough to have a computer in my room, and oh, now I'm old enough for it to be on our AppleTalk network, and old enough for it to be connected to the actual internet so I can use things like AIM.

I always thought those things were like, if I really think back in rites of passage for someone growing up, and I don't think I realized at the time, these are becoming things exactly at the pace that I'm growing up.

David: Totally. It's so funny when you're younger. Now, there's no difference in our age. I think I'm four years, five years older than you.

Ben: Four, I think. Yeah.

David: Four, I think. Yeah. I was probably just a little bit ahead. I was aware of stuff going on with stocks related to tech companies. I knew that was happening, but I didn't think about it in relation to what I was doing. I just think back, the percentage of my time and mental energy directed at and on the Internet just grew, and grew, and grew exponentially during that time.

Ben: It turns out, having the entire world of information at your fingertips is unbelievably valuable and it just permeated everything.

David: Yeah.

Ben: Okay, I have more.

David: Yeah, go for it. I've got two I want to share. Save me room for two.

Ben: I will. Here's the thing we really didn't talk about, but it is very important to understand about Amazon. They were ludicrously, ludicrously private. They never broke AWS out as a segment. They basically had to. They have always kept everything in this gigantic amalgamation of the fewer numbers we can report, the better.

In their S-1, they never said anything about any cohorts, cost to acquire customer, or lifetime value of an Amazon customer. No one in the outside world know 10-Ks, know S-1. Nothing has ever said anything about that information.

Jeff just believes his famous Bezos charts where he's announcing this cool thing for Alexa and he's like, this was the best year ever. You just see an unlabeled axis that's like, oh, it's upper and to the righter. That has served them really well. They're able to do a lot of maneuvering versus competitors, with their suppliers, with third-party sellers, by just never really disclosing any key information.

David: Yup, the same story with advertising as with AWS. At a certain point, they're going to have to break out advertising. It's a $30–$40 billion run rate business at this point. But for a long time, nobody really knew or understood what was happening inside Amazon with that.

Ben: There's this other one. For listeners who are watching on video, you can see that it's now dark out for David and I. We took a break to go have dinner and then reconvene.

David: Slash put the baby to bed.

Ben: Yeah. I was thinking of myself over dinner. Man, I don't know if we're doing a good job with this episode. It's not really a cohesive story. I think it hit me that that is the point. Amazon was doing so much stuff so fast, concurrently, and learning from it, that it's a brute force pathfinding algorithm that has a bunch of concurrent stuff going on.

It's unbelievably entrepreneurial. It is the most successful scale innovator in the world that has ever existed. The two pizza teams thing, which I'm sure many people are familiar with.

David: Which I think might have been a Rick Dalzel innovation.

Ben: Oh, interesting. The fact that for decades, most of the best entrepreneurial talent in Seattle just stayed at Amazon. The knock on Seattle for so many years was that, thank God, Amazon's a pretty big, bureaucratic company at this point and people are leaving to start companies.

David: Oh, the best people stayed. Look at Jassy.

Ben: Totally. The biggest impediment to the Seattle startup ecosystem was the fact that Amazon facilitated entrepreneurship over, and over, and over again, for people at all stages in their career with all levels of ambition. It's really, really impressive, but doesn't really make for a clean story?

Rather than beating myself up over that mid episode here, I was like, I think that's actually the point. Let's do hardware, let's do a subscription business, let's buy a bunch of planes. They started the company and IPO'd within three years. Everything that this company has ever done has been super fast and often concurrent.

David: Yup. How did you phrase it? I think you texted me, the surface area of this company is just immense.

Ben: Is just ludicrous. Yes. It's so large. It's impossible to cover. I actually made a list when I was thinking about, okay, is this maze thing the right analogy of things that failed, and then they backed up, turned left, and tried another thing instead and this heat seeking brute force algorithm? It's incredible when you look at Auctions, zShops. We didn't even talk about the Sotheby's partnership, where they were trying to do a border style thing with Sotheby's.

David: We didn't talk about the Fire Phone.

Ben: The Fire Phone, A9 search engine, which was just wildly underfunded relative to Google search engine, Block View, which was the predecessor to what Google figured out with huge investment to make Street View, investing tens of millions of dollars and startups, like homegrocer.com and pets.com. Over, and over, and over again, there are these huge failures, and yet it's the most successful company of our time.

There are so many other companies where, compare it to Elon Musk, for example. You look at SpaceX, it worked. Tesla, it worked. PayPal, it worked. Boring Company, we don't know yet, but it seems like it could work. Neuralink, jury's out. It's really early, but it's not a failure.

He doesn't go start these things that are completely dead ends the way that Amazon did dozens, and dozens, and dozens of times. But Amazon is so damn good at learning. There's this great quote again in the 97 letter, which is, "We will make bold rather than timid investment decisions, where we see a sufficient probability of gaining market leadership advantages. Some of these investments will pay off, others will not, and we will have learned another valuable lesson in either case."

My big takeaway is, if you're going to look at Amazon as a straight line, it was a philosophical straight line. It was a strategically squiggly line, but it was a tactically random set of dots that there was just a fact finding algorithm going to figure out.

David: Man, I love that. That is such a good point, but that was the strategy. Jeff says it in the shareholder letters all along.

Ben: Yup, absolutely. All right, what do you got?

David: Okay, my two that I want to highlight. One, the opposite of what Jeff talks about all the time of, we're not competitor-focused or customer-focused, blah-blah-blah. Of course, they're customer-focused. Yes, we've clearly painted the picture that they care about customers, the customer experience-focused, long term customer loyalty is the most important thing, blah-blah-blah.

Ben: Isn't it great that there are these Jeffisms that you and I can shorthand because we're pretty sure that our audience knows them at this point, because every interview he's ever done, he says the same things?

David: Yes. It's so funny. Jeff is also such a part of the lineage of great retail entrepreneurs, starting concurrently and before Sam Walton, but Sol Price, Sam Walton, Jim Senegal, Jeff Bezos. You shop your competitors, and you take their best ideas, and then you refine them and make them even better.

That Sam Walton quote that I just loved from Made in America, "Go shop, our competitors. Come back. Don't tell me what they're doing wrong, tell me what they're doing right." Amazon did the same thing, like the eBay story.

Ben: Doesn't Brad Stone have a way that he frames when Amazon is customer-focused versus competitor-focused? I think it's in his second book in Amazon Unbound.

David: Yeah, that might be in Unbound.

Ben: I always thought this was a good way to approach it, where if it's in an emerging market, they're customer-focused because they can afford to be, especially when they're the market leader or they're out ahead.

But when they're in a competitive market like what grocery became, because when they were first starting all their grocery efforts, it was one of the leaders in online grocery, Amazon Fresh is this crazy experiment and ultimately, they fell behind, you have to be very competitor-focused when you're in a crowded market where you're behind. I think they like to be in markets where they have the luxury of being purely customer-focused, but that's not always the case.

David: In some sense, it's a luxury to have great competitors because they figured out good stuff.

Ben: Bezos didn't just steal from other retailers. The other thing about Jeff is he comes from a finance background, whereas a lot of the classic retailers come from a merchandising background or an operations background.

David: Certainly, internet entrepreneurs, very few came from a finance background.

Ben: There's a lot of John Malone in here. When you look at their tax strategy, the fact that they're generating all this free cash flow but somehow never reporting a GAAP profit, and they're never paying corporate income tax because they have no corporate income, and yet, somehow, they're a trillion and a half dollar company, and they have started paying more taxes recently because they have started being profitable, blah-blah-blah. But for a long time, they really were running the TCI, John Malone, playbook of try not to ever show your profitability.

David: We got to do that episode.

Ben: For sure.

David: That's my one of two. Two of two, which was what pushed us over the edge to do this episode now, which is the period of time Amazon got started a little on the early side before the tech bubble, benefited all throughout the tech bubble, and then got hammered arguably harder than any other surviving internet stock when the bubble burst and in the crash.

It was during that nuclear winter leading up to it, not that they weren't doing this all along, but the hard work was done from 2000-2007, where they built out everything they gave them, like the hugely wide moats that we've talked about on this whole episode. That was the time to build and Jeff was completely unafraid to do so. God, it just makes me think so much about it right now. It makes me think about FTX.

Amazon, granted most of it was debt capital, but during the go-go years, they sucked in billions of dollars of capital. Some of it was spent unwisely. But then when the crash came, they invested through it, they built through it, and distanced themselves by miles from their competitors. It's just like a huge lesson.

Obviously, you got to be smart. You got to be right. You got to have managed your company in a way that you have access to capital during those times. That's the best time to build moats.

Ben: Absolutely. How should we grade this one?

David: Yeah, grading. We talked before the episode about, maybe we grade Amazon retail here and then we'll grade Amazon Web Services on the next one. But like you said, this is like a tangled octopus of a company. We only got up to 2007–2008 in the history here.

Ben: Right. I don't feel, based on everything we've discussed in this episode, qualified to assess Amazon retail as it is today. I think we should scope it to the time period.

David: We didn't talk about Zappos. We didn't talk about diapers.com. We didn't talk about Whole Foods.

Ben: Pill Pack.

David: Echo. We mentioned it, but went medical.

Ben: Although Echo, to me, falls under AWS. Why not?

David: Oh, that'll be fun to talk about. Clearly, it's both. I think we should grade Amazon from founding until just before the financial crisis.

Ben: Okay. It's interesting. If the company were to have ended in 2007, I think they were doing about a billion dollars a year of operating income. This is why it's very interesting to be grading on a timeframe with a company that's thinking in a much longer timeframe. If they're generating a billion-ish dollars of operating income, and I think their market cap at that point was something like $30 billion, if you're a shareholder, they haven't really realized those future cash flows yet.

The pedantic way to look at it would be like, well, if the music stopped there, that would have been pretty bad. But, of course, it didn't. Of course, AWS would still come. Their market cap would absolutely explode.

They've turned on the ability, especially with AWS, get very profitable in the future. That's probably the wrong way to look at it. What if the company shut down? It's more about, how do they execute to set themselves up for ultimately realizing all that value for shareholders?

David: Humans are such funny creatures. The hedonic adaptation is crazy. If you go back in time to 2007, what did you say their market cap was? $30 billion?

Ben: Ish.

David: That was a big company back then. I remember, when I started in venture a couple years later in 2010, you weren't playing for exits in the tens of billions of dollars. If we said, oh, well, I got to underwrite this investment, do I think what are the odds that this is going to be worth $30 billion? People would be like, what are you talking about? We need this to be worth a couple $100 million dollars. That's a huge win. We just hadn't realized yet how big this stuff could get.

Ben: Which is, in part, why people needed to be more ownership sensitive or certainly they were more funds obsessed with ownership than there are now. I still actually believe pretty strongly in ownership, especially as a lead investor and why that's important in architecting a funding model. But at the time, if what you're playing for is $300 million–$400 million outcomes, then it's pretty important for your multi hundred million dollar fund to own a quarter of that company.

David: Yes. Certainly, Tom was very happy with their Amazon investment at that point in time. I think we have to give it an A. Especially, as we talked about it, gosh, just incredible execution through that time.

Ben: I do have this fun stat from the IPO. If you had bought 100 shares at the IPO, which I think, did we say $1700–$1800?

David: Market cap of $438 million?

Ben: Yeah. If you bought 100 shares for $1800 of total investment, today, you'd have $2.6 million and you would have made 1500X, which is bonkers. Then the question becomes, should we grade Tom's investment at Amazon as of 2007?

David: I love that. Great A. Unless he sold in 2007, in which case, F.

Ben: Yeah. 2007, the resolution's pretty low, so it's somewhere between $30 and $40 billion. Let's say you're buying in at $5 million and that goes up to $40 billion, that's a 10,000X. It is crazy if you really start following the ripples out. Yeah, Seattle's whole startup ecosystem.

David: Yeah. Of course, there was Microsoft before, too. So many great folks came out of Microsoft to build companies and still, like Nick at Rec Room. Amazon, it's just a juggernaut.

Ben: Yeah. I don't even know how to apply a letter greater than this than A+. The other thing is surviving the dot-com crash. Basically, no one did. Google did, but Google started right at the tail end of it. Every other retailer, and half of them were things that Amazon was invested in, but drugstore.com, pets.com, and all these completely went under.

David: And eBay. I mean, eBay survived. It's around, of course, but it didn't win.

Ben: Pretty believable to make it through that three-year absolute drought of the availability of capital and a complete souring. You couldn't IPO, so if you weren't already out like Amazon was, there's basically no chance that you were going to. I think Google finally IPO'd in 2004.

David: 2004, yeah. Even then, that wasn't like it opened the floodgates.

Ben: Right.

David: All right, we got to go A+.

Ben: A+ execution.

David: Great. We'll do the whole thing on our next episode. If I were to predict a grade for Amazon Web Services, I would predict an A+.

Ben: Why even listen to the episode, David?

David: Right. I think it'll be worth listening to the episode.

Ben: By the way, I've been saying $2 trillion this whole time. I finally just looked it up. Amazon was a $1.9 trillion company, and today is a $1 trillion company. It is crazy what has happened over the last two years.

David: They just reported Q2 earnings and the market liked it.

Ben: It popped 15%.

David: I bet it's closer. Who knows? If we could predict the future, we wouldn't be fans of NZS. By the time this comes out, it's probably fair to say, ballpark, $1.5 trillion-ish. Who knows?

Ben: We'll see. All right, great episode. Should we do some quick carve outs?

David: Let's do carve outs. What you got?

Ben: I have a carve out. I can't remember if you recommended this to me privately or if it was a previous carve out of yours, and that's how I heard it. I just listened to the Rick Rubin episode of the Lex Friedman podcast, and my God, is that a good interview.

David: It's so good.

Ben: Do you think it's a good interview at the beginning? You get 90 minutes in and you're like, this is a really good interview. I think that happens a lot on the Lex Friedman podcast.

David: Yeah, it's so good. Lex is such a good interviewer. His skill as an interviewer is just top notch.

Ben: There's a level of intimacy that he gets with people where it's uncommon to have a level of intimacy. I don't think it's because he previously knows them. I think it's because everybody knows that's what you bring when you're on the Lex Friedman show.

If it's anywhere in your sort of, oh, I should listen to that sometime soon, especially if you're a music fan, and especially if you're a heartfelt music fan, like you're someone who really likes to feel and put yourself in the place of maybe the artist or something they were going through, there's just so much. In particular, the way he goes into the Johnny Cash final album of covers that he did. The Hurt by Trent Reznor.

David: The Trent Reznor Hurt, yeah. Oh, man. The number and breadth of musical history moments that Rick was part of.

Ben: Just sitting there, producing for, creating.

David: Yeah. Not even just sitting there, creating with the artist.

Ben: It's like Forrest Gump in real life.

David: What a legend.

Ben: Yeah.

David: All right. I was going to do just one, but actually I'm trying to decide what to do. I think it's appropriate to do a potpourri, a suite of different types of media here, given that that's Amazon's DNA. They probably bought or consumed most of this through an Amazon service in one way, shape, or form.

Books. I have been reading a few books by Ursula Le Guin, a very famous American author. Great, both sci-fi work and fantasy work, both of which I really enjoy. I read her, I think, probably best known sci-fi novel. It's called the Left Hand of Darkness. Excellent book, highly recommend. I feel like it was written in the 1960s, maybe 1950s or 1960s. I could be wrong on that, but that era of type of sci-fi. It's a character-driven sci-fi, so less about crazy technology and more about as a setting to explore characters. Great.

I'm just starting her Earthsea fantasy series, which I had no idea. Now I'm like reading it and I'm like, oh, and some of the reviews on Amazon talk about probably part of the inspiration for Harry Potter. It's super cool to go get that little bit of history.

Ben: Harry Potter, by the way, broke a lot of Amazon's algorithms. I was listening to a couple of interviews with early engineers who were saying, you may also like or people who like this also like, basically everyone liked Harry Potter. They would have to either special case it or tune some parameters to make it so it just wasn't always recommending Harry Potter with any other product because any other product had a similarity of buyers with Harry Potter.

David: That's funny.

Ben: It's like the Justin Bieber server at Twitter.

David: Late 1990s, early 2000s. Cultural touchstones for the world.

Ben: Yeah.

David: Okay, music. I just today was relisting to My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy by Kanye.

Ben: Dissect?

David: Yes, and then it reminded me, I tweeted about this. I think that was your carve out years ago, season two of the Dissect podcast. The album is a master work.

Ben: I didn't realize what a masterpiece the album was until listening to the podcast. Just the appreciation you get for Kanye as an artist and every single element, musically and lyrically, of every single song, is just next level.

David: We joked about this. I feel we should do a Kanye episode at some point. It'd be the follow up to the Taylor Swift episode.

Ben: The Jedi and the Sith.

David: Exactly. My last piece of media is a throwback to carve out of mine from not that long ago to Elden Ring, the video game. I finally beat it months later. If you're doing anything else and if you have a baby, you're talking months to beat this thing. Unreal achievement of a game, so amazing. I got to say that I also tweeted about this.

I was a little disappointed at the end. I think I felt like I lost steam. I can totally forgive it. If old games were running 100 meters dash and then it got to the point where the achievement of making a triple-A game was like running a marathon, this from Software and Miyazaki, who created it, this is like running an ultra marathon. The amount of work and content and just incredibleness that went into this game is on a scale that no other game has ever matched. It's worth playing, worth sinking months of your life into.

Ben: If you have several months, exactly.

David: Yeah.

Ben: Awesome. Listeners, thanks for going on the journey with us. Man, I cannot wait to dive into AWS research. I try not to research two episodes at once because it's too hard to hold all this in our heads concurrently. I've been resisting diving into the annual letters from 2007 onward and really trying to understand the landscape of cloud today, but that's going to be a great one.

David: This was such a journey, and we're only halfway there. There's more to come.

Ben: Absolutely. Our thanks to Fundrise, Pilot, and NZS Capital. After you finish this episode, come discuss it with all of us at acquired.fm/slack. We got a job board. If you're looking for the next move in your career, go to acquire.fm/jobs.

Big change in all the things that we're calling to action for. I don't even know if that's the right, calling you toward action upon. How many weird prepositions can I throw? These closing calls to action.

Merch, holy crap. It's finally here. Amazon inspired us. Thanks, Jeff Bezos. Your contributions have been many, but you convincing us to start a store on the Internet is perhaps your greatest yet, so thank you for that.

You can go to acquired.fm/store and find some of the finest t-shirts, hoodies, crewneck sweatshirts. What else is there? Tanks and even onesies available. We'd love your feedback as we consider expanding the store as well.

I don't think we have the infrastructure yet for third-party sellers to come on and create their own Acquired Merch, but perhaps we'll explore that if we can get a wide-enough user base to amortize those fixed costs of making a great user experience for you all across. I got to stop. I got to end this. Check out the LP show. You can find it in any podcast player. With that, listeners, we will see you next time.

David: We'll see you next time.

Ben: Welcome to season 9 episode 1 of Acquired, the podcast of great technology companies and their stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert and I'm the co-founder and managing director of Seattle-based Pioneer Square Labs and our venture fund, PSL Ventures.

David: I'm David Rosenthal and I'm an angel investor based in San Francisco.

Ben: We are your hosts. Listeners, David and I decided to open this season with the complete story of the firm that totally appended the entire venture capital ecosystem a decade ago, Andreessen Horowitz.

But as we started researching, of course, that meant telling the journeys of Andreessen and Horowitz themselves before founding the firm. Which of course means telling the history of the web browser, the creation of Mosaic, the founding of eventual IPO Netscape, which was the first real internet tech startup, and of course, the tumultuous story of Loudcloud and Opsware.

David: And so much more than that that you don't even know, Ben.

Ben: This is great. This is the first time I've literally not opened your notes at all. Normally we don't trade notes, but I have no idea what you've prepared. Listeners, the impetus for that is that this was going to be a one part episode until last night when David texted me and said, how about we do a two-parter. There are really things about Marc and Ben that I did zero research on and I'm excited to learn from David along with you all today.

David: I'm like the old legendary Chicago Cubs short stopper Ernie Banks, “Let's play two!”

Ben: Well, I'm really pumped to do this as a two-parter. I think the history of Marc and Ben is really important to understand the world views of both of them and how they were shaped by it. I think for all of us working in a startup ecosystem that was so shaped by the 2009 creation of the firm Andreessen Horowitz, I think it's paramount to understand the things that shaped them because they have shaped us all.

I'm really excited because I feel my investor psychology has already changed since starting the research into Marc and Ben.

David: Totally, can't wait to dive in.

Ben: Listeners, two things to be aware of if you like the show: 1) is our Slack, there is awesome discussion that takes place on not just our episodes but also the tech news of the day going on there. We’re now 8,000 strong, so you can come and join us at acquired.fm/slack; and 2) is the limited partner program. This is where we drop subscriber-only-content like our library of over 50 interviews and deep dives on company building topics like venture capital fundamentals. You’ll also get access to our LP Zoom calls with David and I.

You can click the link in the show notes or go to acquired.fm/lp.

David: Before we dive in, we are switching things up this season. I would like to welcome our presenting sponsor for all of season 9, pilot.com. Pilot is the backbone of the modern financial stock for startups and is backed by all-star investors like Sequoia, Index, Bezos Expeditions, and Stripe. They are truly the gold standard for start-up bookkeeping and at this point, most if not all the companies I work with as an angel investor run on them. Now over to our conversation with pilot co-founders Waseem Daher and Jessica McKellar.

For this first episode, can you start off by telling everyone first what Pilot is? Then how did you all as highly technical co-founders from MIT decided to come together and start a company focused on accounting?

Waseem: Pilot runs the financial back office for your startup. We take care of your bookkeeping, your tax prep, budgeting, forecasting, projections, all that good stuff. And the way that we do it is we connect you with your Pilot team—full-time, US-based employees of ours who specialize in working with startups to take this work off your plate. Pilot is the third company for Jessica, me, and our co-founder Jeff. We all met at MIT and we all studied Computer Science together there.

Jessica: Yeah, we were all nerds in the Computer Club at MIT. Our first company out of school was rooted in the master's thesis of our other co-founder Jeff Arnold. We were building a bootstrap self-funded company around technology for rebootless Kernel updates on Linux. Which was really fun Tech to build a profitable business out of, that eventually was acquired by Oracle.

Part of what sticks out about Ksplice is first, we had to be very tight with our finances because we hadn't taken any external funding. As part of that, we needed to do something that every set of business owners, every set of founders needs to do, which is you need to maintain your finances.

Being the nerds that we are. We're like, oh well, we'll buy a copy of QuickBooks desktop, the book Accounting for Dummies, we'll do it ourselves, and I'm sure it'll be great. So we did that, I'm sure poorly. We even wrote some software (being who we are) to do real-time reconciliation of our books. It was funny because during the acquisition conversations with Oracle, the Oracle Finance and Accounting teams were like, why were you doing rebootless Kernel updates? Why don't you sell this? Why reconciliation stuff?

I think it is stuck in the back of our minds. We ended up extending at Oracle, got back in the saddle, and had another company together that was acquired by Dropbox. We're back in the saddle again with Pilot. I think that the visceral experience of meeting to take care of your finances to maximize the outcomes for your business and just having no good solution was true 15 years ago and it was still true when we were starting Pilot. That was unbelievable to us, and that's a big part of what motivated us to start that company.

David: That's amazing, thank you. You can learn more about Pilot and whether they can help your company eliminate the pain of tax prep and bookkeeping by going to pilot.com/acquired. Thanks to Jessica and Waseem, all Acquired listeners—if you use that link—will get 20% off your first six months of service. We're super excited to have Pilot with us this season. They are really great and I can attest that will make your life way easier if you are a founder.

Ben: Well, David take us in and listeners, normally this is where I would warn you that this show is not investment advice. David and I may have investments in the companies we discuss in the show, it's for informational and entertainment purposes only. But this episode, all this stuff's pretty old. Good luck investing in any of this defunct technology.

David: We're going to be talking about a lot of dead companies in this episode. Next time, we'll be talking about a lot of live companies. One disclosure before we jump in here. I think this is the first time I have done this on this show. I have a new investment vehicle that I'm not quite ready to talk about just yet but I'm doing it with my buddy Nat Manning, who's the COO of Kettle and should tell everybody that a couple of the GPs at Andreessen Horowitz our LPs in that vehicle. I don't think it has affected my telling of the history but everybody should just know that going in.

Ben: Congratulations, David.

David: Thanks. Super excited. Can't wait to talk more about it soon. We start with history and facts. In 1966, in London, England—not what you expected. Was it, Ben?

Ben: So this is not Marc?

David: No, not Marc that we're talking about here. We are talking about Ben who was born in 1966 in London, England.

Ben: I did not know that.

David: It was the ‘60s, the counterculture is in full swing in London. You've got the mods and the rockers—The Who, The Rolling Stones, all that. Ben's family that he was born into (a young family) is living in London at the time. They're American expats. The husband of Ben's father had come to London to work for Bertrand Russell, the—

Ben: Philosopher?

David: Philosopher, polymath, logician, mathematician.

Ben: Oh, wow.

David: So the family already had either one or two children. I'm not sure if Ben is the second child or the third child. But nonetheless, in 1966, Benjamin Abraham Horowitz was born, of course, would grow up to become Ben Horowitz. So usually, on this show on most episodes, we would just stop there with the family. This is the like [...] that our protagonists were born into. We can now move on to the people themselves.

This time we're going to spend a little more time on Ben's family. His mom's name is Elissa, then Horowitz and now Krauthamer, and his dad is David, David Horowitz. That name may not mean much to probably most people listening, but some of you listening are saying, wait David Horowitz, that David Horowitz?

Ben: I have no idea what you're talking about.

David: David was and is a radical political activist and is very much a large and still active part of American History, even though I think most people these days are not aware of it. So at this time, the reason he was in London is he was one of the leading young intellectual radicals that were championing the New Left at the time and the counterculture and they were in London. He was working with Bertrand Russell, protesting the Vietnam War, and advocating for world peace and worldwide nuclear disarmament.

Ben: Oh, wow.

David: He was working with not only Russell but Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, James Baldwin, Stokely Carmichael. He is in the middle of everything happening in the ‘60s. This continues for a couple of years and then in 1968, David gets an opportunity he can't refuse, which is to move back to America and become the co-editor of the magazine Ramparts, which was one of the leading publications of the hippies and the counterculture. They originally published Che Guevara's diaries, it's crazy. Ramparts was based in Berkeley California, which is how Ben Horowitz ends up growing up in Berkeley California.

Ben: It's funny. I knew Ben grew up in Berkeley and I just didn't make the connection that anytime you hear that someone was in Berkeley in the late ‘60s, you should ask the question like what were they doing in the counterculture movement. What role were they playing and how did they end up there? Rather than just being the way you would today, which is like, yeah, it's all a bit of a hippie-dippie town, but it's part of the Bay Area, it's part of technology.

David: Nice suburb, you get the college campus there, better weather than San Francisco. It was a little different back in the day. Speaking of different, we know David is sort of already part of the counterculture. When they get back to Berkeley (get this), he intersects with Huey Newton, the leader of the Black Panthers, and becomes very close with him and with the Panthers. When I say very close, I mean very close.

So he writes about them and Ramparts all the time, helps bring them to National prominence. The whole family, including young Ben, would go to the Black Panther church every Sunday in Oakland, the Son of Man Temple.

This is a little bit certainly outside the scope of Acquired, but just to paint the picture of where Ben came from—the Black Panther Party. If you're not American or from the US and studied American history it was one of the most powerful forces for black and civil rights in American history, and the whole family is right in the middle of it. But unlike Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement, the Panthers did not advocate for nonviolence, shall we say.

Ben: Less about the civil disobedience, more about the disobedience.

David: More about disobedience. I didn't know this but it was actually originally founded as the Black Panther Party for self-defense. The whole purpose of it was to resist police brutality against black people in Oakland, that was the origin of the Black Panthers. This was like wild times. In 1969, FBI director J. Edgar Hoover described the Black Panthers as the greatest threat to the internal security of America. That's how wild this was. They're right in the middle of it, including young Ben—the Patty Hearst kidnapping, everything.

So then in 1974, when Ben was eight, an incident happened which changed things very dramatically. The Panthers needed help with their bookkeeping. Huey turns to David who is sort of running this organization, Ramparts. He says, hey, can you help me when you're bookkeeping. If only they had Pilot, history would have taken a very, very different course.

David introduces him to Ramparts’ bookkeeper, a woman named Betty Van Patter. The Panthers bring her on. Six months later, Betty disappears, and a few weeks after that her body washes up ashore across the bay in San Francisco. The crime was never solved, no one was ever charged, but David and many others believe that she found out too much and the Panthers had ordered her killed.

Later, Ben of course would write The Hard Thing About Hard Things and live through all this crazy technology stuff. You just have to imagine, he was eight and his family went through this. A busted IPO doesn't seem so hard after stuff like this. Anyway, we will move on and get to Marc and Netscape, Loudcloud, and Andreessen Horowitz now. But yeah, it's crazy.

For David, he does a complete 180 and ends up becoming an arch-conservativist. He was one of the primary strategists behind Trump's political strategy for defeating Hillary Clinton in 2016. Jeff Sessions and Stephen Miller were protégées of his.

Ben: Oh, I had no idea.

David: David Horowitz Freedom Center is one of the biggest funders of Trump leading political ideology in America. Crazy enough they still talk, Ben and David. They apparently still have a great relationship. There is a wonderful New York Times piece that we'll link to in the show notes. I recommend everybody go read about all of this that came out a few years ago by David Streitfeld about it. But yeah, this family history is just wild.

Ben: That's fascinating, and it's so cool that family bonds can transcend and not just political beliefs but deeply seated ideological beliefs about the way the world should be.

David: Totally, and yeah that out of all of this, 50 years later comes Andreessen Horowitz. Back to Ben, obviously, he soaks all these in. It has a huge influence on him, but he also wants to blaze his own path and get out of his dad's shadow. He gets turned on to this other revolution that is happening in the Bay Area in the ‘70s, which is the Computer Revolution.

He ends up going to Columbia in New York for undergrad and studying Computer Science there. Probably, wanting to get away from everything happening in the family life at that point in time. He then goes to UCLA afterward and gets a Master’s in Computer Science. While he's there, he interns at the legendary Silicon Graphics.

Ben: Otherwise known as SGI led by Jim Clark who will come up later many times.

David: He's definitely going to come up in the story and SGI is just legendary. I don't think we've talked about them as much on Acquired, but they were right alongside Intel, Microsoft, and Apple. One of the big early computing companies in Silicon Valley. The current Google Campus was originally the SGI Campus. They did not just graphical computing but 3D graphical computing.

They did the effects for tons of Hollywood movies like Terminator, Jurassic Park, the N64 Nintendo video game console, which is going to come back up later in the story, SGI made that. They made the processors for the N64.

Ben: Really?

David: Yeah. So if you played Mario Kart back in the day, you have SGI.

Ben: The thing that I know that we're going to talk about later about N64 coming back up makes way more sense with Jim Clark having the SGI background and SGI making the shift for that now. Is there any tie between Lucasfilm and SGI?

David: Oh, that's a good question.

Ben: The University of Utah folks that ultimately became Industrial Light & Magic.

David: Jim Clark was one of those Utah folks.

Ben: Along with of course Nolan Bushnell and Alan Kay?

David: I think that's right. I don't know if there are any direct ties between Lucasfilm and SGI. Although I'm sure they were using SGI’s hardware for the effects at ILM, at Industrial Light & Magic.

Ben: It was Alan Kay who went to the University of Utah and graduated with his Master's in ‘68. So it would have been that same time as Nolan Bushnell.

David: All this stuff going on. Later, we're now in the very early ‘90s, young Ben coming out of school, coming out of his master's program, he joins SGI. He doesn't stay that long though. After about a year he leaves and he joins a start-up that's coming out of SGI. And that startup kind of fails, but it's his first startup experience, and then he moves on and he joins Lotus.

Ben: Yes. What should have been the way that we all processed words and numbers, but alas, Microsoft crushed them.

David: Yeah. What was it? Lotus 1-2-3, I think?

Ben: Yup, and Lotus Notes.

David: Lotus Notes, yup. While Ben is at Lotus, he hears about this new exciting paradigm development. A new piece of software coming out of not Silicon Valley, but the middle of the country, the Midwest, the heartland of America—Illinois. We are talking about Mosaic, the Mosaic web browser.

Ben: The NCSA Mosaic.

David: Indeed.

Ben: Wasn't it originally X Mosaic?

David: Oh, I don't know that.

Ben: Yeah, it was originally released as sort of a prototype piece of software originally only for Unix systems and used the X Windows System. It was a common thing to denote it with an X in the name of the piece of software.

David: Wow. Well, we're going to get into the name more in a minute here, but then here's about Mosaic and of course its celebrity wunderkind young brash founder, I guess—Marc Andreessen. So who was Marc Andreessen? A man who needs no introduction. But his background was (let's just say) pretty different from the [...] that Ben was growing up in.

He was born in Cedar Falls, Iowa, which is not a super, super small town. But he was raised in New Lisbon, Wisconsin. Do you know what the population of New Lisbon, Wisconsin is today, Ben?

Ben: Ten thousand?

David: Two thousand five hundred and fifty-four people. Marc's father, Lowell, was a sales manager for a seed company called the Pioneer Hi-Bred International Seed Company, and his mother Pat, worked in customer service at Lands' End. I think they would go on to become a sizable customer of Loudcloud, but that is, in the future to come.

Marc talks about this all the time. If you've heard Marc talk about his background, he could not wait to get out of this small town, the Midwest, and computers on the internet where the vehicle he was going to do it. He says of his family, which he rarely, rarely talks about. The one quote I was able to find is he says, "They were Scandinavian hardcore, very self-denying people who go through life never expecting to be happy."

Ben: Wow. It's worth pointing out too that when you say this non-traditional background, you alluded to him as this wunderkind, and that was just not true yet. At this point in history, and we have Brian McCullough from the Internet History Podcast to thank for this. I binged the first 10 episodes of that podcast to prep for this. But he brings up the point that Marc was like an hourly worker at NCSA.

David: Oh yeah. He was getting paid $6.25 an hour.

Ben: Yeah. No one recognizes his genius yet, and the innovation of creating Mosaic of actually mobilizing people to work on this thing was like, hey, we have a lot of fallow resources here. We have some smart people. I have no authority, but I'm going to wrangle the troops to try and do this with me.

David: I think if there's one thing that young Marc Andreessen and now older Marc Andreessen is very good at, it is putting himself in the right environment to meet the right people and to succeed. We're referring to the University of Illinois where he would end up going to college. He was very intentional about deciding that.

He decided that he wanted to go to school, a) to study computer science as we wanted to go to school with a great CS program that his family could afford; and b) he also wanted a place where he would have the opportunity not just to study CS, but to actually work while he's in school, on cool stuff that's going on. And of course, Urbana-Champaign had not just great a CS school, but what we were referred to a few times now: The National Center for Supercomputing Applications was attached to it, the NCSA.

Marc—when he gets to Illinois—he immediately starts doing work-study at the NCSA and while he's there as you mentioned, he's not yet Marc Andreessen. How does he end up coming up with Mosaic? While he's at NCSA, they're interfacing with all of the other supercomputing centers around the world including academic research like particle accelerators.

Particularly, with CERN over in Switzerland, the particle accelerator, which is where Tim Berners-Lee is and that's where Tim Berners-Lee comes up with the set of Standards like HTTP and all that stuff that he dubs "the world wide web". All the way across the world, halfway across the world in Illinois, this kid working there, Marc Andreessen hears about it and he's like, oh well, that sounds very interesting.

Ben: Totally, it's cool thinking about how this came to be because you got Tim Berners-Lee there on one of the few next workstations, like the next cube, that actually shipped and was actually used by people. Because this crazy expensive thing that only went to people working in academia. Of course, this is sort of Steve Jobs' company before returning to Apple. It says so much about Tim and the environment in which the internet and the World Wide Web was started that it was on the NeXT machine.

It came out of this rigorous Academia corner of the world, which is frankly so different from a lot of the startup innovation that is happening today. I mean, a lot of the frontier tech stuff comes out of academic labs. But I think we often forget, especially with how it's sort of countercultural, a lot of new things on the internet have become, that it started in a very...

David: A very closed way, honestly. The original intention behind all these sets of protocols and the World Wide Web was supposed to be just for universities and research.

Ben: So they could share research notes.

David: Yeah, and it was very controversial what Marc was doing because people didn't want to let the riffraff in. They thought it would dilute the quality of this is supposed to be a pure thing about conducting research.

Ben: I got this great quote from Marc. He gave this in an interview in 2003 that's talking about starting Mosaic, and he says, “But the internet community back then, the key technical people didn't want the internet to become easy to use or graphical because that would pollute the environment. Only smart people could use the internet (was the theory), so we needed to keep it hard to use. We fundamentally disagree with that. We found it should be easy to use and graphical. So you should be able to point and click.”

David: Totally. It’s so great. It's really just because of Marc. He doesn't give a crap. He's getting paid $6.25 an hour over it [...]. He's like, well, what's the worst that can happen? I'll just code this thing up. He convinces Eric Bina who's a full-time employee there to work with him and code up an easy-to-use graphical browser to open this up to everybody. They'll fire me if it doesn't work, who cares?

Ben: This is the first playbook theme that I want to pull forward, and listeners who are trying something a little new today, interspersing more of the playbook throughout the story. But this is the very first time Marc runs the playbook of there's something right now, there's only for some small close group of people in an accessible way. I think there's something very interesting to be done by opening up to the masses. And of course, there's no business model behind this yet. It just lets everyone use the internet and let's make that possible.

When you think about Andreessen Horowitz all these years later funding things like Clubhouse and investing in social media platforms like Twitter like Marc did very early.

David: Or help Coinbase.

Ben: Absolutely. It is very much this let's take something very esoteric, make it very available to everyone, and then we will figure it out later. This is the very first time he runs that playbook.

David: The other counterintuitive thing or going against the grain element of building a mass-market browser for the web was that this was not how most people thought the internet was going to go at the time. At the time, this was in the early ‘90s, people were talking about the information superhighway. Actually, SGI was a big part of this. SGI was working with the cable companies to build these internet-enabled set-top boxes.

Ben: Everyone thought it was going to be TVs.

David: It was going to be TVs and even worse, it was going to be the cable companies and the government in a private-public partnership that owned all these pipes. Could you imagine? That they were going to control the stuff that was going to go on there, Americans were going to access it through their televisions.

Ben: This was a big platform with the Clinton Administration when they were campaigning for the '94 election was that we are going to be a big part of the information superhighway from the Federal Government. It's fascinating to zoom out a little bit.

It makes sense that you have these big screens and you have fat bandwidth that's able to send perfect, not choppy, high fidelity audio and video to TVs. And then you look over at this internet thing, which is only a thing for academic institutions, there's 40 nodes or something at all. There are 40 servers on the whole internet and all it can do is send texts back and forth. No, you're not going to bet on that platform to be the way that this ends up coming to market.

David: To be fair to the soon-to-be Clinton administration and in particular to Al Gore, who would become Vice President Gore. In the 1991 Gore Bill, which is allocating funding for all these various internet projects that are being built out in America. They actually specifically allocated funding to the Mosaic Project at the NCSA. This is how they get the resources to pay Marc’s $6.25 an hour salary for all the hours that he and Eric are going to work on coding this thing up.

Ben: See, you're telling me Al Gore did invent the internet.

David: He did sort of. I guess he was like the VC who funded the internet?

Ben: Wow, Al Gore was Marc Andreessen's VC. You heard it here first.

David: You heard it here first. They do this, they create Mosaic. In 1993, they opened it up for anyone to download and use for free. But importantly, this is going to come up again later. They do not open source the code. So the NCSA retains the code behind Mosaic. It's not free, available, and open-source, but anybody can download it and use it. Of course, people go nuts and do.

In 1994, Wired would write, "The (Second Phase of the) Revolution Has Begun. Don't look now, but Prodigy, AOL, and CompuServe are all suddenly obsolete - and Mosaic is well on its way to becoming the world's standard interface."

Ben: Because those were all these walled gardens. Everyone should remember, AOL was not the internet. It was AOL keywords. It was pay to play. It was you could only publish the content on AOL if you did a deal with AOL, which is of course how they had these incredible revenues that they were reporting and everyone thought this was the most unbelievable company ever.

But, the internet was fundamentally something different. The World Wide Web was something completely different. Open is probably not the right word yet but used standard protocols. When you mentioned that it grew like crazy, I grabbed some stats on that.

In February of ‘93 when they released the first version, and this is super prototype-y. There are some great comments from Marc Andreessen out on the NCSA X Mosaic listserv when they released version 0.5 in January of ‘93 that say things like, I'm looking more for feedback on design and functionality than bug reports right now. Don't take the current code too seriously.

New releases will probably come out every 7–14 days until 1.0 arrives. The bulk of the program will be rewritten in C++ anyway. There are disclaimers all over the mailing list that he's distributing this thing out to, but the stats are crazy.

David: It's like the early Ethereum.

Ben: Totally. The next month, there were 12 users in February of 1993. Within 3–4 weeks, there's 1000, and by spring—you got January is that listserv, February is 12 users, a month later it's 1000. By Spring, two months later after that, it had 10,000 users, and then nine months later in early ‘94, it had a million users. The very first thing that Marc Andreessen shipped had insane growth and perfect product-market fit right out the gate.

David: Those were still pretty good numbers today.

Ben: Absolutely.

David: This is in an era when people maybe have a dial-up connection, probably people have PCs, but not that many people.

Ben: The TAM of the internet was super small. If you had a million people by early ‘94 using your software on the internet, I don't know what percent of internet users that is, but it's meaningful.

David: You had 10% of all internet users.

Ben: Totally. It was the killer app for the internet.

David: This is funny. We're talking about 1993, this is also Marc's senior year at Illinois. He graduated in the Spring of 1993, probably when Mosaic was at the 10,000, 20,000-ish user adoption curb. He doesn't think this is going to be a thing. He’s like, oh, this is a cool thing I did as an internship during my college years. I want to move out to Silicon Valley, move out to California and get a job at a real computing company. Famously, he talks about this. He felt like he already missed it. He felt like Silicon Valley had happened.

Ben: Absolutely. I got the quote for this too. Marc did a great interview with the Tim Ferriss Show a few years ago. He says, "When I got to the Valley in 1993/1994, I thought I had missed the whole thing... The great PC companies had gotten built in the ‘70s and ‘80s. And by the time the ‘90s arrived, the PC was done. It was finished, and you could go buy one, and it was great. But it was done."

People in the Valley thought there was nothing else left to do. "And then, there was this moment where I and various people… wrapped our heads around the implication of the internet, which, today, seems obvious. But, at the time, it was very contrarian… if you said the internet will become a mainstream consumer medium that 3 billion people are going to use worldwide for all forms of human activity, you would have been laughed at. You would have been institutionalized."

David: Spoken only as Marc Andreessen can. To insert a playbook theme here, this is always true. There is no moment in Silicon Valley writ large in tech where this is not true. I remember graduating from GSP in 2014 and commiserating with all of my friends being like, we missed it. It's over. The valuations are so high, it's crazy.

Ben: I felt like this after shipping apps to the Apps Store, then I was five or six hit, and suddenly there were a million apps. I was like, shoot, it's over. Meanwhile, machine learning had yet to arrive, crypto had yet to arrive.

David: Michael Moritz at Sequoia has a wonderful saying of this. I don't know that this is actually publically written anywhere, but this is the biggest lesson that he took from Sequoia's Cisco investment, which he was looking at the returns at Cisco. He was like, how are we ever going to top this? This is the top. We'll never do better.

He was talking to Don Valentine about it and Don was like, it's always going to be bigger. As long as Moore's law continues, then the number and scale of industries that computing and technology can address are always going to grow as long as that is happening. The next generation is always going to be an order of magnitude bigger than this generation. That is played out time and time and time again.

Ben: Of course, Moore's law technically didn't continue, but the number of cores for the same price that you can put on a single system on a chip has followed the same trajectory as Moore's law. Even when we hit the upper limit on certain things in Physics, the industry seems to figure out a way to continue to have the spirit of Moore's law and the price and power of compute continue such that, this is another Andreessen saying, but at some point, the hardware limitations go away and compute becomes free. Then it's really all about with an infinite and free resource of compute, what you can do with software?

David: Yup. Back to Marc. He can't even get a job at a bigger respected PC or software company. He moves out in Palo Alto and he gets a job at Enterprise Integration Technologies, which I think was a tech implementation consulting firm doing PeopleSoft installations for companies.

Ben: Sweet.

David: You can imagine Marc Andreessen’s fit with an environment like this. Of course, as this is happening, this is when Mosaic is rocketing up this adoption curve. It's this weird thing where he's this kid out of school, working a no-name job, but he's kind of a celebrity.

Ben: He's gotten kind of shoved out and there are two sides to this story. I think the folks in NCSA would say that Mosaic was an official project, Marc says they sort of self-organized. It became very clear to him that the bureaucratic leadership at the NCSA was going to take the lead on this and start doing the press interviews. They did own the license to the source code, so he was an employee and it became NCSA's thing, not Marc Andreessen's thing.

David: Yup, oh boy is that going to come back. Enter Jim Clark. Of course, Jim Clark, founder of Silicon Graphics, SGI, Utah Mafia Alumni. He had just left SGI, he had been feuding with the board and he's out. He's looking for his next thing, but he has a non-solicit from SGI so he can't take any of his people with him, but he knows he wants to start a new thing. He's got a chip on his shoulder. He's like, I got another act. I'm going to prove all these people wrong. He needs to go find new blood.

He hears about Mosaic, he tries it out, and he's like, this is amazing, this is the future. I got to look up this Marc Andreessen guy who's there on the about page. It’s like Mosaic by Marc Andreessen. He cold calls him and they get together, they have breakfast. I think Marc would famously say this is the one and only time he got up at 7:00 AM in his 20s.

Here's how it goes down. They have breakfast and Jim was like, Marc, you should commercialize this thing that you're doing with Mosaic. You got to get out of this job and I think we should do it together. Marc was like, I don't know. I'm really enjoying this consulting lifestyle, doing software implementation, PeopleSoft. [...] hell no, let me get out of here. Let's go do this damn thing. No, that's not how it went down at all.

You probably know this Ben from the research, but you would think that would be now, in retrospect, an obvious thing. No, Jim does take a shine to Marc and he's like, okay, great. I want you on my team in the new team I was assembling. I want some young blood, but the idea I have is this N64 Nintendo Console that we've been working with Nintendo over at Silicon Graphics. This is going to be the perfect information superhighway node into living rooms. This is how we're going to win the internet. We're going to build an online service for the N64 console.

Ben: It makes sense given the background, given the hype that was going around N64 at that time. I see why that was the belief.

David: I remember being a 12-year-old reading every single gaming magazine that would come out just trying to get details on the N64. I got mine on launch day. I would have convinced my parents to pay any amount of money for an online service for that console.

Ben: Which is so interesting that this is what they conceived of instead of the browser because this would go on to become a huge business. You look at Xbox Live three, four decades later, this becomes an enormous opportunity. But at that time, this would have been absolutely the wrong move and there's another playbook theme. Marc has a quote that says, "If they had shipped a year earlier," referring to the N64, "we probably would have done that instead of Netscape."

David: The history turns on knifepoint. The console gets delayed for a year and because of that, they'll never be able to reach a deal with Nintendo and it's unclear that anything's going to happen. Meanwhile, they're both itching to get a company going.

They have a brainstorming session where they're thinking of other ideas for stuff to do and eventually, Marc is like, okay, you know this Mosaic thing? I did build that and all my buddies that I did it with back in Illinois, they're about to graduate too or they have already graduated. We can just go hire all of them, recreate it, and commercialize it. Jim's like, okay, fine. Let's do it. They incorporate and they start the world-renowned, going to be history-making, Mosaic Communications Corporation to commercialize Mosaic.

Ben: I love that they were like, yeah, we'll just use the same name. We'll name our company Mosaic even though that's a thing that's owned by that lab at the university.

David: Obviously, NCSA was not too happy with this. They threatened lawsuits all back and forth. Eventually, they changed the name to Netscape Communications, and that is how it came to be. It was actually Greg Sands who was the first PM that they hired.

Ben: Greg Sands of Costanoa?

David: Greg Sands of Costanoa, previously of Sutter Hill.

Ben: Oh, awesome.

David: Greg Sands’s little sister Emily was at Princeton with me and Jenny and was Salutatorian of Jenny’s class. One of the absolute top five brilliant people I've ever met in my life. They changed the name of the company to Netscape, but the internal code...

Ben: I was going to ask you if you knew this.

David: Yes, the internal code name that they used and that they continued to refer to the actual browser code itself is Mozilla, which stands for Mosaic Killer.

Ben: It's so good.

David: It's so good. If you are wondering where Mozilla came from, that's it.

Ben: Yup.

David: Clark at this point in time, his network from SGI is around $15 million or so. He puts in $4 million. He finances the whole thing himself, hiring all these great people like Greg.

Ben: Which by the way, his network was $15 million from SGI not because that was a little company, but because he had to take on a colossal amount of financing on very onerous terms in order to make that company succeed.

David: Totally. That he would walk away with $15 million from SGI after decades.

Ben: $15 million and a chip on his shoulder.

David: A huge chip on the shoulder. He's wary of all these VCs that financed SGI. I think NEA was the big VC behind them and took so much equity. He puts in $4 million, but then he's worried about well, this is really getting a lot of buzz, starting to take off. We're going to need more capital. I don't have enough to finance it myself. I guess I will bring on some venture capitalists.

He goes and talks to his old buddies at NEA, but enters Kleiner Perkins and John Doerr hears about the deal and outbids NEA, invests $5 million in the fledgling Netscape Communications Corporation for 25% of the company, so 20 post.

Ben: Wow.

David: Times were different back then. Not too long after that, Ben our erstwhile, steeped in hippie Berkeley, true Bay Area culture DNA friend Ben, he's overworking at Lotus at that time and he had heard about Mosaic of course. He's been using it. He thinks this is the future. He hears all about this going on in Netscape and he was like, I got to get in there. I got to make it happen.

He asks a friend, get him into the connection. He goes to the interviews, he gets the job, and he gets put in charge of the enterprise web server product line at Netscape.

Ben: This is because there aren't web servers yet, right? What's the point of having a browser to load webpages if there's no software that can sit on servers that can create web pages?

David: Exactly. This is going to become really big, but at that time, I don't know what Ben was feeling. Whether he was excited about this or not, but it was like, okay, this is how we're going to make money. We're going to sell licenses for the server business so that companies can create websites and have commercial websites. The big sexy thing is this browser that is getting millions of people using it. It's this part of the company that was, yeah, necessary, this is how we're going to make money.

Ben: It is a beautiful time-tested business model. Give away the consumer thing for free, get as many people on that as you possibly can. It's actually the first real example of aggregation theory. Netscape ends up becoming powerful in the ecosystem because they are able to get all the internet users using it, and thus, then apply pressure to businesses that if you want to create great websites, you can do so. We promise it will be compatible with Netscape, the browser that everyone uses, so you should buy these tools from us. It makes a lot of sense.

David: Really, I think it only came about because of the history of Mosaic being part of NCSA. If some company like Microsoft were to otherwise have gone out and created a new piece of software like they did with Word, Excel, or PowerPoint that they bought.

Ben: Consumer licenses.

David: Yeah, the natural thing to do. You put it in a box, you put it in a CD, you shrink wrap it, you get it to CompUSA, and you would sell that sucker for $50–$100 to every consumer that walked through the door. Not the route that the browser took to its great advantage.

Ben: Which is fascinating because that affected everything henceforth. I've never paid for a web browser. You can make an argument that people are paying for Brave in different ways or certain people are paying for specialized browsers, but it sets the trend that you do not pay to get access to the web.

David: Yeah, totally. Famously, people at Netscape would talk about how we invented internet time, and that it was this parallel universe that was accelerating faster than reality time. By August 1995, we're just 16 months after the company started.

Ben: In April ‘94.

David: In April ‘94, Netscape had an 80% market share of web browsers in the world and they decided—Jim Clark pushes them—that they're going to go public.

Ben: And they successfully killed Mosaic at this point, 80%. Just 12 months ago, the other thing that Marc Andreessen created had close to 100% of the market share, which is wild.

David: It turns out they haven't totally killed Mosaic.

Ben: Sixteen months you're talking from founding to IPO, like any good tech company.

David: Like any good tech company. The bankers, Morgan Stanley, Frank Quattrone, and Mary Meeker on the analyst side have taken them public.

Ben: Just absolute killers.

David: Killer superstar.

Ben: Frank Quattrone of the Amazon IPO. Mary Meeker of Bond Capital and famously the Kleiner Perkins state of the internet.

David: Yup.

Ben: The people who would go on to do unbelievable things took this company public.

David: Totally. They're not quite sure how to price that. Nothing like this has ever happened before, so they decided they're supposed to price at $14 a share. I didn't do the exact math, but that would be roughly $500 million or $600 million market cap, shall we say. Astronomical at that time. I mean, 12 months ago this was a 20 post-Series A that Kleiner did.

They're thinking $14 a share the night before. Clark—remember he's pretty salty when he walked away at SGI—pushes them to up the IPO price from what they ended up pricing at the night before to $20 a share. The next day, the stock doesn't open because there is so much buzz about this company. Obviously, the institutional demand is high and famously, institutional investors were kicking themselves for having missed out on Microsoft a decade earlier and how big that became, so the hype is this can be the next platform. This can be the next Microsoft.

Meanwhile, they’ve got millions of people like moms and pops, and kids using this thing on their home PCs. They all hear in the news that Netscape is going public, they're using Netscape, they want retail on sale on the IPO.

Ben: You’re telling me there's going to be a POP?

David: This is like the origin of the POP, the IPO POP, early-stage three IPO POP. Famously, Charles Schwab, the brokerage, had to change their phone systems leading up to the IPO because remember, there are no internet brokerages at this point. You can't place orders online even through Netscape.

They changed their phone system so that when you called your broker at Charles Schwab, you would get a message in the couple of days leading to the Netscape IPO that said, "Welcome to Charles Schwab. If you're interested in the Netscape IPO, press one." There is so much demand it takes hours to open up the stock on the day of the IPO. It opens at $75 a share.

Ben: Wow.

David: The bankers were like, I don't know that we can go up to $28 the night before.

Ben: They thought they were going to price it at $14, the bankers reluctantly IPO-ed it at $28, then the first retail trade happens at $75?

David: Seventy-five, yup. It falls a little bit during the day but it closes at $58 a share giving the company a $3 billion market cap.

Ben: Just insane.

David: Totally insane. I think Microsoft was about $10 billion at this point in time, if I remember it right.

Ben: It's worth saying a few things. One, this absolutely kicked off the dot-com bubble. This was the moment that it started. There were a couple of internet IPOs before this, but this is the one that blew the doors wide open, made valuations not matter, and created 4 1/2 years of absolute madness from this point forward. But Netscape had an unbelievable growth trajectory, not just in users, but in revenue. In the Ben Horowitz corner of the business, revenues were doubling every quarter, which means they were 16X-ing revenue year over year.

David: They’ve only been around for five quarters.

Ben: Sure. But a 16X year over year run rate on revenue?

David: They did $17 million in revenue in the first six months of 1995 alone, which for a company that entered 1995 being eight, nine months old and then was doing run rate $50 million, $60 million revenue in that first full year of existence, that is very impressive.

Ben: Yeah, for sure. The other thing that's worth mentioning here is that it was unusual for companies at this point in time to IPO without being profitable. Bankers were making this exception of, this one is going to be hot even though the company is not profitable. Whereas now you look around and it's absolutely the minority of the time that a company is profitable before the public is willing to take on the risk of continuing to finance that company. It's just funny how much things have changed.

David: Netscape IPO, this was a cultural moment for tech, for the world, for finance, for everything

Ben: Funny story. This was only six days before the launch of Windows 95, so this is the most interesting month ever in the tech industry to this point.

David: This must have been on the risk factor of the IPO prospectus, I didn't look it up. But if there's one bear narrative on the Netscape IPO, it's Microsoft. Everybody knows Microsoft controls Windows. They control the operating system of 95% of the install base of PCs in America, in the world at that point in time. What are they going to do?

But nobody pays too much attention and famously, shout out to Brian McCullough for finding this and calling it out. Around the IPO, Marc gives an interview and says famously that when he's asked if he's worried about Microsoft competing and he says, I'm not worried about it. Netscape can become a company that will turn Windows into a "mundane collection of not entirely debugged device drivers." Well, pride comes before the fall as we all know. Obviously, this is Microsoft in the ‘90s, which is an absolute killer.

Ben: Pre-DOJ.

David: Pre-DOJ, which happens because of all of this. In May of that year, Bill Gates saw this happening. He saw Netscape, he saw where this was going to go. In May of ‘95, he had written the internal internet tidal wave memo.

Ben: For anybody who hasn't read that, it is just worth reading in its entirety to understand 1) the genius of Bill Gates, but 2) to understand the context of that time. Even Bill Gates, even Microsoft who was so steeped in this stuff, their strategy was the information superhighway. They were long all this stuff—interactive TV—but they just like most other people did not predict that this low-end disruptor— the internet—based on text being sent over HTTP and images, in line that Marc Andreessen managed to get into the browser too. That that actually was going to be the thing.

It's not until early 1995 when he pens that memo where it becomes obvious even to the smartest, well-positioned people in the whole tech industry to react to this.

David: Once he realizes and writes that memo, oh boy, is it ever game on.

Ben: Guns out.

David: This is a strategic priority, number one of the company. We're going to compete here and we're going to win. It turns out, they actually have the perfect strategy to kill Netscape already in progress within Microsoft. Which is that back in 1994, Thomas Reardon—a famous Microsoft employee and then would go on to be a founder of CTRL-labs, which Facebook acquired a couple of years ago—was playing around. He thought browsers were interesting, this is going to be a thing.

He had licensed for Microsoft some code for a browser from a little company called Spyglass, Inc., which happened to be located in Illinois in Urbana, Champaign. Why was it located in Urbana, Champaign? Because it was the commercial entity started by the university to spin out and commercialize the IP that they developed at the NCSA including the Mosaic web browser.

Microsoft has got a license to the Mosaic web browser. They're like, well, we got this license, we can use it. The terms of the license are actually that we pay Spyglass a portion of the revenues that we make for distributing this thing.

What if we just bundle it to Windows and we give it to everybody for free? Oh my God, stone-cold killers. There actually ends up being a big lawsuit about this. Spyglass sues Microsoft and is like hey, you're giving this away to hundreds of millions of people and you're not paying us anything because you're not charging for it.

Ben: Classic Microsoft, legally they're like, hey, we savvily negotiated an agreement with you. Sorry, it's your fault that you didn't anticipate the way that we would go on to distribute this thing.

David: Famously, they ran this playbook and have done the same thing with DOS back in the day.

Ben: This is worthy of a quick sidebar because this is absolutely unbelievable and is part of the reason Microsoft got sued. But Microsoft had a deal in place where in order to use DOS at all, to license DOS from them. If you're an OEM making computers, you had to pay them whether or not you chose to use DOS as the operating system on that PC.

It was a per CPU shipped license. If you're a PC manufacturer, in order to get access to DOS, Microsoft is like, sure, we’ll license it to you, but we're not tying the amount of money that you owe us to the amount of computers with Windows on it. It's the amount of CPU you ship.

Then, of course, the incentive there is for the OEM to say, well we got to make the most of this license since we're going to be charged for it anyway. They put Windows on everything they shipped and that is how Microsoft became the dominant platform with DOS where then every application became written on top of DOS because every CPU had DOS on it.

David: Famously, Microsoft did not develop DOS. They did a very similar deal, they licensed it.

Ben: From another Seattle company.

David: Another story for another day. God, they were killers. The net of it is even after the lawsuit, they pay a grand total (Microsoft does) of $8 million to Spyglass, which goes back to the University of Illinois. The NCSA and University of Illinois get $8 million for Mosaic, which becomes Internet Explorer. That's right, Mosaic, which Marc Andreessen and Eric Bina wrote at NCSA, the IP stays at NCSA in Illinois, spun out into Spyglass, licensed from Microsoft, that is Internet Explorer.

Ben: For anyone who is thinking, geez, how did Internet Explorer launch so quickly after Microsoft needed to catch up and needed to create a browser, this is how it did it.

David: People know that this is happening and Netscape knows that this is going on.

Ben: Meanwhile, Netscape at this point is helmed joining before the IPO was a new CEO, Jim Barksdale. They brought in a professional CEO operator. He was the former COO of FedEx. He came from McCaw Cellular and AT&T before that. They have this grizzled industry veteran at this point because even Jim Clark—for all of his executive-ness from SGI—before the IPO Netscape, actually did want this robust professional public markets CEO.

David: Everybody knows this is going on, but Netscape thinks and the market thinks that okay, Microsoft got this Internet Explorer thing, they licensed it to Mosaic. They're going to run the Office playbook here. They're going to sell this at CompUSA and you're going to buy it.

As you said Ben, two weeks after the Netscape IPO, they launched Windows 95 and not fully bundled in then, but they say there's Windows 95+ pack and Internet Explorer is bundled into it for free. Of course, this would eventually, very quickly, Internet Explorer would just be directly bundled to every copy of Windows 95 and then Windows XP. All of a sudden, Netscape is now forced to compete with free and bundled like every operating system basically on the planet.

Ben: Absolutely brutal.

David: Totally brutal. Now, this little division that Ben Horowitz is running, the enterprise server division, becomes hugely more important. This is the only part of the company where they can even conceivably compete against Microsoft, and this becomes a major strategic initiative in Netscape. We're going to focus on enterprise server products.

Ben: Of course, the enterprise server products have to produce web pages that are compatible with Internet Explorer because that is now what everybody is using. It sucks.

David: It's so brutal. Famously, Ben and the team start scrambling. They're going to make the product way better than the Microsoft product. They're working on a bunch of new features. They lined up a big announcement event in New York City for March of 1996 about the new version of the product. And famously, two weeks before the event, Marc ends up giving an interview to Computer Reseller News (of all publications) where he just reveals the whole thing. Ben sends an email to Marc. The email says one line, "I guess we're not going to wait until the 5th to launch the strategy." The email was from Ben just to Marc.

Marc responds, copies in Jim Clark, copies in Jim Barksdale, and says, "Apparently, you do not understand how serious the situation is. We are getting killed killed killed out there. Our current product is radically worse than the competition." Competition being Microsoft. "We've had nothing to say for months. As a result, we've lost over $3B in market capitalization. We are now in danger of losing the entire company and it's all server product management's fault. Next time do the [...] interview yourself. F You, Marc."

Ben: Reading this email in print—and of course, we're being family-friendly here on the air, but just saying F You, Marc. I just can't imagine sliding an email that way.

David: Here's the best part. That email was written the very same day that the Time Magazine cover came out.

Ben: The Barefoot, no way.

David: The Barefoot. Marc Andreessen on the cover of Time Magazine barefoot on a throne as the throne of the next new Silicon Valley King. Marc would later say about this whole escapade, "this is why I should not run a company." No kidding. Maybe you should be a venture capitalist instead.

Ben: That's actually a good question. In Marc's entire career, including the Loudcloud story that we're going to go on to tell later, has Marc ever been the CEO of a company?

David: I don't know. Was he the CEO of Ning?

Ben: He was the CEO of Ning, you're right.

David: Okay, so once.

Ben: We'll get to that. It's very interesting that of all the biggest successes, he was either effectively the co-founding CTO, a board member, or the venture capitalist behind it and not the CEO of any of the most successful stuff he's done.

David: This is going to be great (I don't want to say a lie because it's not a lie, but the) posturing from one of the key elements at the beginning of Andreessen Horowitz, which was their motto that all the general partners here need to have been CEOs. But half of the first five or six general partners have never been CEOs.

Ben: Right. There's a lot of credibility behind that they were strong operational leaders, executives, but yeah, it's a good point.

David: Absolutely. Jeff Jordan led the PayPal acquisition and ran PayPal within eBay. He was not the CEO of eBay, but I would take him on my board. But yeah, that's funny.

Ben: I think this is a good point. Before we get into the '96, '97, '98 continuation of the browser wars and what happens to Netscape—and I'll leave it there for the moment—this is a great time to announce our second sponsor of this season of Acquired.

We are very excited to welcome PitchBook to the show. As many if not all of you know, PitchBook is the leading financial data provider for VC, private equity, and all mergers and acquisitions. Their platform includes a database with information on more than 3.1 million companies and over 1.5 million deals.

I'm going to deviate from the script here and just say it is so comprehensive. There is no better, more broad coverage data source of private company data and a lot of public company data out there.

I'll tell you, they definitely don't sacrifice quality for quantity because 96% of their clients rate PitchBook's coverage of private company data as better than any other data provider. We also do want to tell you, we use PitchBook all the time for the podcast. It is a huge part of how we research and how we do our homework for episodes. We're able to share these precise details like pre- and post-round’s share price, shareholder equity, and who owns what throughout the story because of PitchBook. This has been true for years.

David: If only Jim Clark had it back in the SGI days, maybe he wouldn't have gotten diluted so much in his negotiations.

Ben: So true. I'm thinking back to our Uber episode where we were telling the share price along all the different years as it was getting funded. That was all from data we pulled from PitchBook.

Listeners, we do have a special offer for you. You can explore PitchBook's database first hand by signing up to get limited access. You can get free access to the largest database of private market intel for two weeks to steep yourself, see what we're talking about, and see for yourself. You can visit pitchbook.com/acquired to take advantage of that, or click the link in the show notes to see how PitchBook can help you.

All right, David, we're in the browser wars. Microsoft just blew Netscape out of the water. What's going on for Netscape now?

David: Such a tragedy. That year of the IPO in 1995—this actually was a really great company—Netscape did $85 million in revenue in 1995. Then, in 1996, it did $346 million in revenue. Then $534 million the next year in 1997. People love to dunk on this now as IPO mania, unprofitable, blah blah blah tech bubble. It was for real.

Once the Microsoft bundling strategy became obvious here in December '95—which is when they announced that it was going to be bundled into all copies of Windows 95 going forward—the stock had peaked then at $171 a share, which is even hugely up from where the IPO was. But it never got above that. It was just straight downhill from there, unfortunately.

In 1999, finally, famously, Netscape sells itself to AOL for $4.2 billion, but it's an all-stock deal with AOL. That's pre-Time Warner merger. Who knows by the time shareholders actually ultimately got liquid on that, what they were able to get out. Marc Andreessen, as part of the sale, became CTO of AOL. You can imagine how well that's going to work out.

Ben: The funny thing is he's not actually responsible for any day-to-day operations. He's like the chief futurist at AOL. I think his role is forward-looking technologies or something like that. He only lasts until September of '99 right ahead of the Time Warner deal. He's like, yeah, I want no part of this and leaves before that.

David: Yeah. Oh, wow. I didn't realize he didn't even stay a year. I wonder if he forfeited some earn-outs. Or maybe he was just like, the stock is going to be worthless soon anyway. I'm out.

Ben though, this is going to become very interesting. Actually, this deal becomes huge for the next chapter and ultimately, for Andreessen Horowitz (the firm). Ben becomes the VP of AOL's ecommerce division. What he ends up doing is him and pretty much the whole old server team from Netscape, what he figures out is what they ultimately are tasked with doing are all of the brands that are trying to sell on AOL within the AOL walled garden—this is Nike, this is LLB, and this is Lands' End.

We're talking about all these retailers and CPG companies. They want to sell, but they're not Internet companies. They don't have ecommerce apps, servers, and all the infrastructure that they need to make this happen. AOL can help them, but they got to go stand up like servers and data centers for all of these customers. That's what Ben's team ends up doing. Quickly, he realizes there's actually an opportunity here. AOL is going to do this for their partners selling on AOL.

Ben: Which again, is not the internet or at least is not the web.

David: Yeah. It's the internet, but not the web. I know that this is where the whole market is and is going to be in the future.

These companies, Nike, et cetera, are going to need help doing the same thing for their web applications. Why don't we go start a company where we can operate this infrastructure for all these companies that are not technology companies? Then, they can just host their websites and their web applications on our infrastructure like a cloud of internet infrastructure that you can just deploy your applications to.

Ben: You can dynamically spin up and spin down these virtual machines, David, so not even like owning your own server, but having virtualization across multiple servers that scale elastically as you need them.

David: Yeah. This is a big idea, right, Ben?

Ben: Wow. In '99, that feels a little ahead of their time.

David: Maybe a little ahead of their time. But they like the idea so much that they moved back to Silicon Valley. They leave DC where AOL was based. Actually, I don't know if they ever moved there or stayed in Silicon Valley. But they left AOL and they started the company. They really want to embrace this cloud concept that they're pioneering. They call it Loudcloud.

Ben: I can't wait to get into this. I do want to close the loop on a couple of Netscape things though before we move into the Loudcloud chapter.

I was wondering, first of all, why did AOL buy Netscape? If they're getting wrecked by Microsoft, why are they giving $4.2 billion of their stock? Is it because they knew their stock was wildly overvalued? Let's say it's 10X overvalued, what's $400 million of actual value to go and pick this company up? Which is what we now know about the way that they were motivated to do the Time Warner deal to basically do a stock swap for a company whose stock they felt actually had real intrinsic value.

It makes a lot of sense that they would wildly overpay for this pseudo-defunct Netscape even if all they got was the people and some technology behind it. That's one explanation.

The other would be basically to get a bargaining chip against Microsoft in case it became relevant for them to try and be less dependent on IE to have a browser of their own that they could bundle in and distribute. There are other people who believe that AOL was interested in Netcenter, which is basically Netscape's web properties which drew a lot of the traffic. It's like the MSN play that Microsoft had to be the destination website.

Those are the reasons why AOL could have been willing to part with $4.2 billion of their stock to do this. If you trace it all the way through to today, I really have been trying to figure out what happened to the Netscape brand and what happened to the Netscape IP?

The brand is an easy one to trace. That stayed with AOL until they ultimately were bought by Verizon. The big red checkmark Verizon owns the Netscape brand today. But somewhere along the line, the brand actually got separated from the technology, the bundle of all the intellectual property and everything that Netscape was, which did need a new name because they couldn't use the Netscape name anymore because that brand was owned by Verizon.

That got renamed to the New Aurora Corporation, which AOL sold to Microsoft, who then, in turn, sold them again to—wait for it, David—Facebook.

David: Oh, yes. Oh my gosh, I'm so glad you found this.

Ben: This is from James Zawinski or jwz who was an early employee, pseudo-founder. I think many credited him with being a founder of Netscape. He has this great blog and this crazy bar and concert venue in San Francisco called the DNA Lounge. He writes, "The former Netscape company is currently a non-operating subsidiary of Facebook, still known as the New Aurora Corporation. The Netscape brand remained with AOL." How crazy is that?

David: That's so crazy. I'm so glad you paused us because there's another thing we got to talk about coming out of the Netscape.

Ben: Mozilla.

David: Mozilla, of course. I didn't realize this actually happened before the AOL acquisition.

Ben: They were open-sourced in 1998, I believe. But yeah, you're right. Before AOL, they open-sourced all the browser code. Ironically, it's so interesting that Mozilla—the code name of the Mosaic killer—ended up becoming the name of the foundation that ended up stewarding the open-source code project, which of course then created Firefox. Out of the ashes of the duplicated—without ever looking at the code—Netscape, which came from Mosaic, you then have Mozilla.

They did name the browser Mozilla for a while and had a separate browser called Mozilla, which was compiled from similar source code, and then Firefox.

David: Which was a whole new thing, right?

Ben: There was some code in common with the original Netscape browser.

David: But it was very different. Firefox, when it first launched (I remember this), had the search bar in the browser which was a concept they borrowed from Opera, but that was not in Netscape.

Ben: Correct. It was in the top right. It wasn't the omnibar that Chrome pioneered. It was that separate search window. But it makes sense to me now, knowing all this lineage, why user agents have always been such a mess.

This is going to date me, but if you've ever written raw HTML code and needed to do a user agent check because you need to figure out if it's IE and you need to account for some three stupid pixels offset that they have that shouldn't actually be in there but the rendering engine sucks because it's licensed from whatever old Mosaic thing, that's actually an unfair criticism.

The real reason why it sucks is because they had such a dominant market share that Microsoft could do whatever they wanted, deviate from spec, and just say, everybody's using our stuff anyway. Who cares what the World Wide Web Consortium says it should do? The truth is what we say it is.

Anyway, if you ever do these user agent checks on the strings, it has every browser name under the sun listed. If you're doing a string search, you're looking and you're like, what is this Mozilla/Firefox/Netscape/blah blah blah? It's because it all comes from the same original branch. All these different browsers are competing against each other, but there are only two major lineages. There is the Mosaic lineage and then all those engineers left. Without looking back at the old code, they wrote a new code called Mozilla. Everything is basically either from Mosaic or Mozilla.

There have been different stuff over the years with WebKit and I don't know where Opera is derived from, but it's amazing how much of the browser market share over time really just comes from those two.

David: Yeah. It all still funnels through to today, which is crazy. It's so fun to actually have the right excuse now to be able to tell this whole story on Acquired. It always felt like there was a point in Acquired's life where we would have done a whole episode on Netscape, but now it's like, I don't know what we can do. This is the perfect vehicle. I'm so glad to do it.

Ben: Totally. Thank God for the lessons of Netscape and Loudcloud, which we're about to go into. Became the ashes upon which the phoenix of a landscape-changing venture firm would come from is the way they excuse.

David: The Firefox of venture firms, shall we say?

Ben: Honestly though, after the financial crash and all the funding, it's not crazy to call it a Firefox, a phoenix, or whatever in founding a venture firm in 2009 and deploying capital the way they did. I'm jumping ahead. I know we'll get there.

David: Absolutely. If you want to be really nerdy, you could call it the Thunderbird of venture firms. I used to use Thunderbird. I thought it was great.

Back to the story, Ben and his server team have realized this market opportunity. They've got this idea for cloud computing, cloud infrastructure. He hooks up with two of his core team, Tim Howes and Sik Rhee. They leave AOL. They go back to Silicon Valley. They're like, we're doing this. It's still 1999. The bubble is still quite inflated at this point. There is a lot of hype.

Ben: And everyone's drunk. Netscape IPO-ed with great revenues and great growth, but now everyone's just drunk.

David: Yes. Immediately, they want to get Marc involved. Of course, who wouldn't want Marc Andreessen involved in something like this? Marc totally gets it. He's like, yeah, this is a big idea.

Actually, this is amazing. At the press briefing for the launch of the Loudcloud, Marc would be there. In trying to describe what this cloud infrastructure concept is, he would use the very same electricity metaphor that Bezos would then use eight years later describing AWS at the YC event.

Ben: What is the metaphor?

David: Bezos's analogy that he used was German beer distilleries used to produce their own electricity to mash the hops and everything and do what they're doing in the distilleries. Then, they hooked up to the grid and just used electricity from the grid. That innovation they realized is that electricity doesn't make the beer taste any better. There's no reason why they should create electricity.

The whole idea of cloud infrastructure is the same thing. Renting your infrastructure from Loudcloud, Amazon, Azure, or Google doesn't make your beer taste any better if you're an application provider. Marc was the first one to use this, so of course, they want to get him involved. But remember, Marc has learned at this point that he shouldn't run companies. Although I guess he made that mistake with Ning later.

Marc says, I don't want to be an active co-founder, but I'll be Chairman and I'll invest $6 million. I guess he was able to get enough money out of the AOL stock that he can invest $6 million.

Ben and the team go out to raise venture money on top of this and they meet Andy Rachleff at Benchmark Capital who they just love. Ben in The Hard Thing About Hard Things, a quote that he has describing Andy. He says, "If I had to describe Andy with one word, it would be gentleman." The relationship between him, Ben, and Marc is deep and continues to be deep to this day. Andy, of course, was Benchmark's infrastructure guy. He started as a telecom investor, so this is completely in his wheelhouse and he gets it.

This is where things get a little murky. No doubt this scene is one of the major seeds of Andreessen Horowitz and the firm's whole philosophy. It would get sewn right here. I don't know exactly how it went down. I don't think anybody's ever given the whole story, but this is as best as we can reconstruct it. We'll have to just have the protagonists on for a kumbaya one day.

Obviously, this was a super hot deal. Netscape had "failed," but like you said, Ben, everybody was drunk at this point in time. Somehow, I believe that Andy and Benchmark agreed to do the deal without a full partner meeting. They agreed to do it for a very high price even at the time, which was a $45 million pre-money valuation and Benchmark is going to invest $15 million in the company.

Ben: It's a big check for them. Are they even doing their $400 million funds at this point? Probably around that.

David: No. I think this was before their billion-dollar fund, which famously they said they'll never repeat. I think their funds were maybe $250 million, $300 million at this point in time. Big check, big valuation, a brand-new company, and no partner meeting. At least as far as I can tell. The deal is going down and the Benchmark partnership though doesn't like that Marc is investing so much personally. He's not an actively involved co-founder. He's investing $6 million.

Here's the thing. The price of the deal is based on a pre-money valuation because venture deals—until the last five, six, seven years—all used to be priced on a pre-money valuation. Now, the problem with a pre money valuation—

Ben: Nobody knows what they actually own until you specify exactly how much is being raised.

David: Exactly. If more money gets raised, then you're going to own less of the company because the post-money valuation goes up based on the amount of money raised. Benchmark is writing this huge check. They want to get 15 divided by 60. They don’t want to be the only money into the round.

Ben: Then they should have specified the post, David.

David: They should have specified the post, but people didn't do that back in the day. Here's Marc coming in now. He's pumping the valuation up by $6 million and he's coming in. They tried to cut Marc out of the round. That was wrong move number one. You don't really want to cross Marc Andreessen.

Ben: Even if we just stopped the episode there and say, let's look at this from a single-turn game versus multi-turn or iterated game, massive, massive bad idea for Benchmark to contribute to creating Andreessen Horowitz in the future. Sure, it could have been the most valuable thing to do for this deal at that moment, but for the next 20, 50, 100 years, it would be a great benchmark if Andreessen Horowitz didn't exist.

David: Not only if Andreessen Horowitz didn't exist, but if Ben and Marc were part of the Benchmark family.

Ben: Totally. That's an even better point. Creating a little bit of a friction point here, assuming that that is any factor contributing to going on to create their own venture firm.

David: Well, that wasn't the only part. It gets worse. Supposedly, after the deal is done and closed, Marc of course is like, F You. I'm putting my $6 million in. Do you think you're going to come between me and Ben? We've been through this—it'd be like Benchmark trying to come between you and me. That's not going to happen.

Marc invests the $6 million. It's a $66 million post-money valuation. Benchmark only gets 22.7% ownership after the deal is done. This is why I think they didn't present the whole partnership before the deal was done. Because Ben, Marc, and the whole leadership team of Loudcloud, of this new company, come in to meet the full Benchmark partnership. I think they only really knew Andy at this point.

They come in. It's supposed to be like a slap on the back, get to know you. Oh, this is great, you’re our VC firm. Hey, that was weird with Marc, but we'll get over it.

Supposedly, in this meeting, David Byrne, who was then one of the GPs at Benchmark and had been a very successful executive recruiter before joining Benchmark as a GP. Ben is presenting. The whole management team is there. He says to Ben in front of everyone, hey, just stop. When are you going to get a real CEO? Ben is like, what do you mean? He knows what David means here, but he's trying to be like, hey, this is a friendly meeting. Let's not break out the knives yet.

Ben: In front of the management team.

David: In front of the management team and Marc.

Ben: That just pulls out the rug underneath his ability to lead these people to do that.

David: Yeah. Apparently then, Byrne just doubles down again and keeps attacking Ben. He's like, you're not qualified to lead this company. How are you going to take this thing public, all of this stuff? Which also is ridiculous because of course, Ben is qualified to lead this company. Even if he weren't, why on earth would you say this?

Ben: He was doubling revenue quarter over quarter at Netscape in his division. On top of all of that, Marc Andreessen threw $6 million in. He kind of needs you, but doesn't really need you. And you've already committed. Just do the value-creating activity of giving the leadership team the confidence in their leader at this point.

David: Totally. This creates, as you can imagine, an intense dislike between Ben and Marc and all of the Benchmark partnership except for Andy because I guess nobody else really stepped up to defend them here. We will later, in part two, get to the amazing profile that Tad Friend did in The New Yorker of Marc Andreessen in 2015. But 2015, 16 years later, there are these great quotes in there.

Ben says about the whole philosophy of Andreessen. He says, "We were always the anti-Benchmark. Our design was not to do what they did." He's talking about this. Then, Marc says about Bill Gurley—the most visible Benchmark partner at the time—"I can't stand him. If you've seen 'Seinfeld,' Bill Gurley is my Newman"—Jerry's bête noire.

Ben: This is something that you definitely have to know about Andreessen Horowitz, especially in their early days when they were starting. They were loud about being different. They wanted to position themselves in every way we possibly can, we are the opposite of your classic venture capital firm personified by Benchmark.

David: We're going to get into this in part two, but it's so great because that is the exact same playbook that Benchmark took against Kleiner Perkins when they started.

Ben: It's fascinating. It's such a good strategy.

David: Who was the architect of that strategy? Andy Rachleff. Who is the one Benchmark partner that they love? Andy Rachleff. Andy would then retire from Benchmark not long after.

Ben: And the ties here end up actually running deep. Eric Vishria who was a Loudcloud exec would go on to become a fantastic partner at Benchmark.

David: Here's the funny thing about all of it. This is so great. It's such a drama. I really do think that this experience was a big part of what planted the seed for Ben and Marc to start Andreessen Horowitz.

All of this drama is just great for everybody. It's great for Andreessen. It's great for a Benchmark. No press is bad press. The more that people are talking about and writing about this as Andreessen Horowitz is getting off the ground, the more it just increases the stature of both firms.

Ben: Yeah. The 2015 piece you're talking about is literally called Tomorrow's Advance Man about Marc Andreessen. That's the one you're mentioning, right?

David: Yeah.

Ben: That is the puff piece of puff pieces. It's a great analytical piece. But it's like, hey, you're the best futurist in the world. Say whatever you want. Having a platform to be able to do any of this stuff, Marc takes full advantage.

David: Oh, totally. It's so smart. All of this drama around the funding aside, nonetheless, people are still jazzed about Loudcloud. Two months after Series A, there is another $45 million. Wired runs an article calling Loudcloud Marc Andreessen's second coming, but then the clock starts to run out.

Ben: It's also crazy that the press can't get enough of Marc Andreessen. Ben Horowitz is running the company, but Marc is like this Internet King narrative that everyone just wants to keep perpetuating, which is true in many ways, but it's just interesting that he was not the CEO of either of those companies.

David: Yes, but he was on the cover of Time Magazine on a throne. Here's the thing though about Loudcloud which is very different from Netscape. It's not a software company, it's an infrastructure company. The thing about an infrastructure company about what they're doing is that if you want to grow, if you want to take on more customers, you got to go lease some more data centers and you got to go—

Ben: Buy some more servers, rack them…

David: Rack them and stack them.

Ben: It sounds like Capex to me, David.

David: That sounds like a lot of CapEx. As they're raising all this money, they're investing forward in all this CapEx and they're getting orders in. Pets.com is like oh, yeah, I'm thrilled to get some of this infrastructure.

Then, in early 2000 of course, in March 2000, the bubble starts to deflate. A lot of these orders start vaporizing, but they have forward contracts to buy all this CapEx. They need money even though they just raised $65 million. They go around—this is such a great moment. They're trying to raise money from everyone and all the VCs are spooked at what's going on. They're literally traveling around the world. They go to SoftBank. I don't know if they actually fly to Japan or if they meet with SoftBank in the US.

Ben: I had no idea.

David: They meet with Masa. This is great. Bill Campbell, the legendary coach, is by this point in time on the board of Loudcloud. Masa backchannels Bill and says, this is in The Hard Thing About Hard Things. Ben is like, Bill, how did it go with Masa? Bill's like, honestly, he thought you were smoking crack. You know it's bad even when he's like, this is crazy.

Eventually, they do raise a Series C of $120 million at a 700 post, but it's by the skin of their teeth. This is in the mid-2000. They still burn through all that quickly and are once again on the brink by the beginning of 2001. The only crazy last-ditch potential financing option available to them is to try and go public because weirdly, there were still some believers in the public markets, even though all the VCs and private investors at this point were like, oh boy, we don't be funding any of these money burning companies.

In March of 2001, they actually went public at $6 a share and the Wall Street Journal ran a piece leading up to the IPO. It’s called the IPO From Hell. I think it might have been either referenced in the piece or the title of the piece, everybody's calling this the IPO From Hell. They have a quote from Dick Kramlich at NEA saying, "This is what we call a Hail Mary deal. You throw it up in the air, and you hope for the best."

Ben: Oh my God.

David: You know that's not good. Immediately after the IPO, which they did get done, they lowered their guidance.

Ben: It’s a great thing to be doing in your first quarter as a public company.

David: Totally. The stock dropped by 2/3 to $2 a share and Goldman and Morgan-Stanley had a book run IPO, they dropped research coverage on the company.

Ben: No way.

David: Before even one quarter is done, amazing.

Ben: What's the logic there? It’s just expensive to have analysts covering your company and they're like, look, we just don't believe in the company anymore even though we underwrote it, so we're going to stop paying analysts to do this work?

David: That's a good question. It could be that or I wonder if it's more that if we were to cover this company, we would say you should not invest in this company. You should sell, and we don't really want to do that because we were just the book-runners on the IPO. It’s probably easier to just drop coverage.

Ben: The logic of why they're dropping guidance is like, look, all the companies that we thought we're going to be customers are going out of business. We are a picks and shovels business for an industry that is going away.

David: Yes. The gold rush is drying up. People are not going to want to buy Levi’s and at this point in time—

Ben: No one is moving to California.

David: It's unclear yet that Levi's are going to become a fashion statement, which of course they do, metaphorically speaking.

Ben: David, you're like three levels deep here. Take me back to storytelling.

David: Exactly. Okay. By 2002, it's clear that they're running into a brick wall. Ben manages to engineer a deal to offload the entire infrastructure business to EDS, Ross Perot's Electronic Data Systems company.

Ben: With that, we need to do a company profile on it at some point. That's like a fascinating one

David: Totally. They sell, basically, the entire business for $63.5 million. They lay off almost everybody at the company.

Ben: That's 1/10 of what they last raised at. No, they went public for more than that, for more than $700 million.

David: I think it was actually about flat when they went public.

Ben: So 10¢ on the dollar is what they're liquidating the server business for.

David: Totally, but they don't give up. They decide we've got this tool that we've built internally to help us provision the servers that were racking in our data centers. We might be able to sell that as software, it's pretty good. EDS is actually really interested in this. They want to own the infrastructure business because that's part of their business. But they're like, if you can deliver that as a software product, we’ll pre-sign up and will be at $20 million a year customer for you for the server automation product.

Ben: Which is $20 million that Loudcloud is like great, we can use that to make payroll.

David: Exactly. They do this. They laid off most of the company and they restarted as this software firm doing data center server automation. There's only one problem. The tool that they built, which is so great, has no UI, it is called the Jive, and is entirely pimp-themed.

Ben: That's just one problem.

David: That’s just one problem. It's not exactly something you can really deliver to EDS or any customer. When this happens, the stock [...] to 35¢ which is a $28 million market cap. Remember, they've got $63.5 million in the bank and a solid $20 million a year customer contract.

Ben: Talk about trading below book value.

David: The street is valuing them at half of the cash on the books. But Ben is undeterred and this is mostly what he writes about in The Hard Thing About Hard Things. They go to work and they rebuild the company back up. They clawed their way all the way back—over really not that long a period of time—to five years later, they sold the company to HP for $14.25 a share or $1.6 billion.

Ben: Close to 2X what they went public for.

David: Totally. This is a win. Ben would write later about this, "If I’d learned anything it was that conventional wisdom had nothing to do with the truth and the efficient markets hypothesis was deceptive. How else could one explain Opsware," which is what they changed the name of the company to, "trading at half of the cash we had in the bank when we had a $20 million a year contract and 50 of the smartest engineers in the world?

No, markets weren’t "efficient" at finding the truth; they were just very efficient at converging on a conclusion—often the wrong conclusion." This experience I think would totally inform really what I think was the founding thesis of Andreessen Horowitz, which was there is no bubble. The internet is going to keep getting bigger. You all think we're crazy for paying these prices for these companies, but we're not crazy.

Ben: Yeah. What you're alluding to there, for folks that don't know, Andreessen Horowitz’s early reputation is that these guys started a brand new venture firm. They raised too much money because then in 2009, a $300 million fund was big, and they're just giving startups these crazy valuations, overpaying, and blowing everybody else out of the water.

David, you're exactly right. The efficient market hypothesis is wrong, and also that any crash we’re in is a local minima. All that matters is can you get through this localized crash and continue to ride the intrinsic value wave that is the internet and software taking over everything?

David: Totally, and it's not easy. Literally, the title of the book that Ben writes about this is The Hard Thing About Hard Things.

Ben: Which is so good.

David: So good. It’s such a good title. It's like they had good marketing people there or something.

Ben: To your point about it not being easy, Ben gets asked in interviews. How do you get through that when you had to lay off half the company and then get the other half to recommit to basically starting a new startup with you? His answer is, a lot of crying by me. It's brutal.

David: But I think the lesson to be learned from this and it totally resonates for me is if you're in a technology market and you find yourself early to the market like they did with the cloud and virtualization.

Ben: Beating AWS by seven years.

David: It's not good to be in that situation. But if you could just hang on and stay alive until the market can catch up with you, these markets will grow. You can become a big, big player even if everybody's already written you off.

Ben: Can you stay alive long enough to become lucky?

David: Yup. Obviously, it's better to be lucky upfront, but if you're not, wait for luck to come to you. Anyway, there's one more other fun little part of the Loudcloud Opsware journey. One of the characters that's going to become very important later in part two, which is one of their other board members.

The board of Loudcloud, pretty awesome, Marc Andreessen, Andy Rachleff, Bill Campbell the coach, obviously Ben, and the other independent board members who they had, do you know who it is, Ben?

Ben: No.

David: Michael Ovitz.

Ben: That's how they met Michael Ovitz?

David: That's how they met Michael Ovitz. Of course, we're talking about super Hollywood agent, founder of Creative Artists Agency, Michael Ovitz, later erstwhile CEO and President of Disney under Eisner.

Ben: Briefly.

David: After the whole Disney debacle, he was looking for stuff to keep him entertained and wanted to invest in the then hot internet area. He gets introduced to Ben and Marc and ends up joining the board of Loudcloud. Isn’t that wild?

Ben: Wow. That's how Marc and Ben get infected with the idea of creating the CAA of venture.

David: Totally. It's so funny how we’ve painted hopefully the picture on this episode of all the life experiences leading into Netscape, leading into Loudcloud, leading into that moment with Benchmark, and then Ovitz joining. It all gets expressed by Andreessen Horowitz.

Ben: There's one more principle that you touched on earlier that I want to tie a little bit of a bow on that's a founding principle of the company. When Ben Horowitz is getting dressed down in the partner meeting at Benchmark and they ask him when are you going to hire a professional CEO? This becomes a major tenet of Andreessen Horowitz about technical founders being CEOs, being armed with the resources that they need, and the ability to—even before they would otherwise acquire those skills—have a leap on being a professional CEO.

There's this 2003 interview—I love reading things from 2003 about Marc and Ben because it's this really interesting perspective where it's post-Netscape, post-Loudcloud, post-crash but they're just angel investors. It's six years before they start Andreessen Horowitz. One of the questions in this great Q&A that we’ll link to in the show notes is, should a founding technologist run a mature company? Marc’s answer—he's a brilliant person. He gives these long philosophical answers to every other question. This one he just answers absolutely.

David: It's so great. This is so brilliant. We'll talk about this much more in the next episode. But what's so smart about this and so dumb about the rest of the venture capital industry until Andreessen changed the game. Let's put aside what's right or wrong or what you believe or don't believe. It was so dumb to preach and practice anything else except that founders should run the companies they start because if you say anything else, who are you alienating? You're alienating founders.

If you want to win deals, why on earth would you say anything other than I support my founders and I'm loyal to them to the end?

Ben: Yeah, just wild. Well, before we continue on a little bit, I want to unveil our third sponsor of this season. We are joining the ranks of Casey Neistat and PewDiePie this season to tell you about NordVPN. But we are doing this in our own little way, Acquired listeners. This company has a wild story behind it that we are excited to tell you about.

NordVPN, as you may know from other fine podcasts, is a product by Nord Security. It works on all major operating systems. It's become one of the world's largest VPNs. They hold the title I think for the world's fastest VPN. They're now a global company with over 700 employees—700 worldwide—and are used by an astonishing 15 million people. Yes, the internet is a big place now that there are 15 million people using one VPN client. It’s a big, big business.

But here are some things you may not know and why they're working with us this season on Acquired. The company is one of the rare big tech companies that were started in Lithuania. It was founded in 2012 by four childhood friends. The co-founder and CEO Tom Okman is a member of the Acquired community. He literally DM-ed David and I in Slack. He's been listening to the show for years. Insanely, with Nord, they have grown to this whole crazy scale that I just talked about without taking $1 of outside funding.

This is impressively a bootstrapped company that has products used by 15 million people and 700 employees. We're super excited to be working with them. I love this culture, this ethos, this founding story. If you're looking for a VPN service, look no further. You can sign up at nordvpn.com/acquired by clicking the link in the show notes or go to Nord and use the coupon code Acquired at checkout. Our thanks to NordVPN.

David: It’s so cool. Pumped to be working with you guys.

Ben: Yup. Okay, David, take us forward. They sell the Opsware business to HP. What's going on after that?

David: We've alluded to Ning a couple of times. Along the way, Marc had started Ning.

Ben: What year is this? What year is that Opsware sale? We did the episode with Michel Feaster.

David: Yeah, which was so great.

Ben: She was at HP and bought the company.

David: Way back in early Acquired history. I want to say it was 2005. I actually didn't ever [...] down when Marc started Ning. It was 2007 when Opsware was sold to HP. Marc was going along with Ning and Ning was a way for any community to launch their own social network. I guess in a way like what we have with our Slack community.

Ben: It’s like white label Facebook.

David: Yeah. Once again, ahead of its time. Marc, I think, was not super thrilled with how that was going. He ended up stepping back full time, right after the Opsware acquisition, brought in Jason Rosenthal from Opsware who had been a Netscape guy before that to come in and run Ning. Marc stepped back to just being a chairman.

Remember, now we’re in 2007. We're now in the heyday of web 2.0, which is so funny. At any other point in time, if we hadn't had the tech bubble, the crash, and everything everybody lived through here, the rest of the market would have been gaga over Facebook, LinkedIn, Zynga, Shutterfly, Flickr, and everything that was going on. It was so exciting in the Valley. But because everybody still had the hangover from web 1.0, valuations were minuscule for these companies.

Ben: Well, in 2000, 2001, 2002, even in 2003, venture firms weren't raising new funds. Everyone's preciously holding on to the last fund they raise, parceling out each dollar to their own portfolios, trying to make sure they're only investing if it's the very next Yahoo, and using their bullets very carefully. When Facebook came along in 2004, it's one of the only obvious ones that's growing like absolute crazy and kicks off that next generation of venture capitalists are going to be able to start raising big funds again and come out of the tech bubble screaming.

David: But even that takes a long time. Ironically, it's Marc and Ben, arguably people who got hammered hardest by the dot-com crash, who recognize like, this is the time to put capital to work and embrace everything that's going on. They start angel investing together.

Ben: Right. This is the era of super angels if you think back to the Ron Conway and Dave McClure era. There was the famous Bin 38 scandal. But Marc and Ben are these super angels that are individually investing tens of millions of dollars in startups.

David: It's easy to forget now but they were the prototype super angels. Easy to forget now because now of course they're a venture firm.

Ben: Of course, Marc made $150 million on the Opsware sale from—I think it's about right because he owned about 10% of Opsware at the sale to HP, Ben owned 5.5%. They've got cash to invest and they're dedicated to helping to build the next generation of startups.

David: Yeah. And not only that, this is where the pieces start to come together. They also embrace (as users) web 2.0, and that’s a big part of web 2.0? It’s blogging. The Pmarca blog and Ben's blog, this is where it all starts.

Ben: It was so good. Marc obviously became a prolific tweeter tweeting 100 times a day. Then 2016 he stopped, and we’ll cover all that in the next episode, but very much embracing the idea that I'm going to be allowed on the internet. I am going to share my thoughts with the world and very early to blogging.

David: Yup. Through all this, they end up angel investing in companies like Twitter, of course, Zynga, Facebook.

Ben: LinkedIn. Marc is still on the board of Facebook and still keeps up with Mark Zuckerberg.

David: I hope so. The Facebook story is super interesting. When Andreessen Horowitz (the firm) launched, they launched with a big piece in CNN Money. Zuck is quoted in the piece. He says, "I moved to Silicon Valley in 2004, and I was introduced to Marc Andreesen [by Facebook backer Peter Thiel] in 2005. Marc became a sounding board about management and how to build a strong technology company. He has strong views on that, and they helped shape mine. Marc homes in on important things. It's very liberating. He has helped me not worry so much about the unimportant things."

What is Zuck talking about here? Remember the Yahoo situation?

Ben: Where Zuck turned down the $1 billion offer.

David: When Zuck goes and vomits in the bathroom turning down the $1 billion Yahoo offer. Literally, everybody around the table is telling him to sell. Supposedly all the VCs, everybody involved with the company, all the rest of the management team are like, we got to take this offer. Because remember, web 2.0, Flickr sold to Yahoo for $30 million or something like that.

Ben: Something like that.

David: The idea that there could be a $1 billion outcome now post-bubble is crazy. Apparently, the only one of the advisors who told Mark not to sell was Marc Andreessen. Andreessen has a quote about this. He says every single person involved in Facebook wanted Mark to take the Yahoo offer. The psychological pressure they put on this 22-year-old was intense. Mark and I really bonded in that period because I told him don't sell, don't sell, don't sell. That is why Andreessen ended up joining the Facebook board in 2008 as well as the eBay board in 2008.

Ben: Yeah, that's a fascinating one.

David: That'll come up next time for sure.

Ben: He stayed on the HP board by the way after the Loudcloud Opsware deal until 2018. He was a long-time HP board member too.

David: Yeah. It's pretty crazy. They built up this vehemently founder-friendly, don't sell, build big companies, we're going to finance you…

Ben: Technical co-founders stay as CEOs forever.

David: Yup. We love technical co-founders. We are willing, just the two of us, to finance 45 different companies.

Ben: Including digg.com, AngelList, Foursquare, LinkedIn—a lot of very meaningful companies of that era, high hit rate.

David: They're the most active venture capitalists in Silicon Valley at this point. This is when Sequoia’s writing the RIP Good Times memo, and they're not even venture capitalists. This is the best. I think this is my favorite part of the whole episode.

One day, Ben is still at HP. He becomes a VP of something at HP and it’s clear, this is going to be just like the AOL situation. He's going to stay there for a year and then move on, do his next thing. He gets a call from Doug Leone at Sequoia.

Ben: Interesting.

David: This is such a classic Doug story, I love it. Doug says, I want to know how you did it. Ben’s like, did what? Doug says maybe not quite these words, but maybe actually these words knowing Doug. I want to know how you took a dog of a company and turned it into a $1 billion outcome. I've never seen this happen before and I want to learn how you did it. It’s so great because a) it's so Doug, what a learning machine; b) it's so great because it's obvious what is happening here.

Ben: He's trying to get Ben to come to Sequoia.

David: He's totally trying to get Ben to come to Sequoia.

Ben: Do you think they wanted to recruit him as a partner or as a person to come fund next?

David: I'm sure they would have been happy with either, but I'm assuming probably as a partner. I bet they were trying to run the same playbook they did with Alfred, which is when Alfred joins Sequoia after Zappos. The original idea, Don Valentine says this in the Stanford GSB talk that we always recommend when he holds up Alfred's resume. He says, yeah, Alfred’s here. He’s a partner at Sequoia for now. But he'll start more companies and we can't wait for him to start companies and spin them out.

Obviously, that doesn't happen with Alfred. But I'm sure they just want Ben and presumably Marc as well to just come be part of the Sequoia.

Ben: Man, we don't do dissection episodes anymore but in the spirit of what would have happened otherwise, do you think about if Ben had accepted an offer to go be a partner at Sequoia? If Benchmark hadn't made the cardinal mistake of causing the executive team to potentially lose faith in their CEO right there in the boardroom, how things could've been different in the Valley?

David: Well, the funny thing I was thinking about through all this is obviously as we've alluded to, Andreessen Horowitz is going to counter-position against Benchmark when they launch. Nobody ever counter-positions against Sequoia. I think it's just because like how could you? They’re so good.

Ben: Yeah. It reminds me of the quote from The Wire, you come at the king, you best not miss. I don't really want to make a run at Sequoia. I wouldn't publicly counter-position against them.

David: I was thinking the exact same thing. Ben takes this call. I don't know the exact timeline here, so I'm both hypothesizing and dramatizing for effect. But with that said, he takes the call. He knows what Doug is up to. He hangs up with Doug and he shoots Marc an instant message. We ought to start a venture capital firm and Marc replies, I was thinking the same thing. Boom. That our friends is where we're going to leave part one.

Ben: That is a perfect, perfect spot. I feel like I now have a really robust understanding about the frame of mind therein going into starting Andreessen Horowitz (the firm). The question is when they're texting or whether they're on IM, is this before the financial crisis?

David: I am imagining this is sometime in 2008.

Ben: Yeah, which is fascinating because then between the time where they have the idea to do this and when they actually launched the firm, there is a global recession and bank financial crisis that they have to fundraise during. It’s pretty wild.

David: Totally.

Ben: I think we did a lot of great playbook themes during the episode, are there any you want to highlight here?

David: Yeah. There is actually one, and we'll get into this more next time but it's pretty courageous.

Ben: Did you choose that word carefully?

David: I did not, I did not. It came to mind. It's pretty courageous what they do here. Okay, it's not courageous in that they have a lot of money. They never need to work again, etcetera. To turn down Doug Leone, to say we have a lot of money but we're going to deploy this money and put it at risk while all the rest of the world thinks everything is falling apart.

I think it's easy to look back now and be like you guys of Andreessen Horowitz has $19 billion in capital under management and is this massive, enormous 200+ person firm with all these funds and like, yeah, you guys are money managers. That is not how it started by any stretch of the imagination.

Ben: Yeah, that's such a good point. We'll get into this next episode, but from everything that I can hear, that's still the way that Marc and Ben act today. That they're by no means enjoying the $19 billion under management lifestyle. I think they're very much thinking about what is the next, not just generation, but what is the next epoch of Andreessen Horowitz (the firm) looks like. What are we beyond a venture capital firm? What will this institution be in the future? The way that you chose courage carefully, I chose the future carefully. We’re going to talk about both of those in the next episode.

David: I love it.

Ben: I've got a few just to bring it back. The timing, luck, and right place, right time are so strong here. I mean, especially in the N64 slipping one year part of the story, Netscape wouldn't have existed if N64 had shipped on time. As crucial as it is to be brilliant, you have to be brilliant in the right place at the right time and get lucky also. People always talk about Steve Jobs and Bill Gates being born at the right time and the right place to be able to start Apple and Microsoft. Kind of the same thing with Marc being around right for the start of the internet and being able to really jump on the emerging web and create a huge part of it.

I also think a big playbook theme is knowing what good feels like because you've experienced it yourself. In launching Mosaic and getting a million users in the first year on a very nascent web, for Marc's whole rest of his career, that's the bar. If you've never experienced something like that viscerally where you've operated, founded, or worked at a high level at a company that was undergoing that, because you don't know what the benchmark is, you don't quite know what you're chasing.

I think it meaningfully shaped all of his future experiences, Ben's experiences, and Andreessen Horowitz’s experience when they knew what true product-market fit and crazy growth felt like from the very first experience.

David: I got one I really want to add to that. I totally agree. Yes, everything you said. And what makes it really powerful is the contrast. They also know what total failure looks like. I think you see a lot. People think, like what you said, knowing the benchmark, knowing success, that's what you need. I think you need both because if you only know success, you don't know the difference between success and failure. You don't really know what made for success and what was skill and what was luck.

But I think what's really unique here in this story is they have absolutely both the highest of the highs, lowest of the lows. I think that can really help one triangulate where you are at any given point in time and why.

Ben: I totally agree. I think it's a great point. Well, listeners, we're going to hold on grading until the end of our next episode. We'll have that conversation about actually the firm, Andreessen Horowitz, rather than trying to create something about Marc and Ben’s past. David, do you want to do some carve-outs before we bring it home?

David: Yeah. Let’s do it. I've got a fun one that is tangentially related to at least the N64 aspect of the episode. I've just been on such a gaming and classic gaming kick lately. I don't know what it is. Maybe it's like you hit your mid-30s and then you just get nostalgic for the era when you were a kid. My carve out is my new favorite podcast (besides Acquired of course), the Resonant Arc YouTube channel and podcast. These guys are so great.

They call themselves a video game storybook club. They take old classic video games like RPGs from this era. They did Final Fantasy VIII. They're now doing Xenogears. They did the first Nier game, which is more modern in the interim.

Then they do like a book club. They do playthroughs. They're like we're going to play not a stream, but we're going to play from the beginning of the game to X point. We'll go play, you audience go play, and then we're going to do a podcast. We’re going to do a three-hour podcast at each checkpoint where we’re going to dissect the story, the development, who was the dev team, how did this project come together, and what is the context behind all this?

Ben: That's a clever structure.

David: It's really, really clever. I really like it. It ends up for all these games being 10, 15, 20 hours-worth of podcast time, but it's so cool. It is a really innovative format.

Ben: You know you're talking to people who are willing to dedicate 10 hours of podcasts time to a single podcast like a Berkshire Hathaway trilogy. Couldn’t have found a better place to recommend it.

David: A podcast after my known heart.

Ben: I love it. I have a little bit more of a serious one. It's a nonfiction book called The Elephant in the Brain, and it is a psychology book that was originally going to be this person's academic paper. Then they decided I'm just going to get together with my friend, actually write it as a book instead, reach a much broader audience, and publish it as a consumer-facing book. It is a really interesting book.

One of the main thesis is that we humans are animals and so why do we try and go around pretending that we're not and trying to do things that are socially acceptable when there’s an elephant in the brain, that we are animals and we are subject to these very base desires that come from evolution. It's not saying act on those, but every chapter points out a different and very observable basic animalistic thing that exists in our brain.

The thing that I took away from it was once you can be more mindful of the way in which your brain is not acting “logically or appropriately” as you should present in society as it says it's acceptable to. Just being aware of the way that your brain is working and why it is working in that way so that you can then apply your higher functions on top of it is very interesting.

I highly recommend it for anybody who is interested in psychology, capitalism, how to fundraise for nonprofits, how to lead, how to organization-build—all of this stuff is tied in there. They basically take anything that seems like people are doing purely altruistically or purely for whatever reason. They find the animalistic desires that underpin that and then find the data to support why that is often happening. Especially if you're interested in going into politics, it's a phenomenal read.

David: I love it.

Ben: I recommend that. All right. Well, listeners, thank you for joining us on part one of this journey. Thank you to our sponsors, pilot.com, PitchBook, and NordVPN. If you want to join us and talk about all things Acquired, all things tech with a great community, really thoughtful, respectful, good highbrow discussion, join us at acquired.fm/slack. As always, if you want to be a deeper part of what we do on the show, you can become an LP at acquired.fm/lp. David, anything else you want to say?

David: I'm pumped for season nine. We are underway.

Ben: I know, me too. I think this next episode is going to be really fun. Andreessen Horowitz has played such a seminal role in the development of the tech ecosystem of the last 12 years that it's a walk down my whole adult life and career to walk through from 2009 to today. I'm excited to do it.

David: Yeah. Should we start recording right now, just run it back? Let's play two.

Ben: No, I need a break. Listeners, we'll see you next time.

David: We'll see you next time and until then Yung Spielburg, Mike Taylor, take us out.

‍David: Ben, when we teased this episode in the email about the Jensen episode that we just released, the guesses that we were getting from folks were amazing.

Ben: People were like, it's Charlie, it's Warren, or it's Taylor Swift. A lot of people were right.

David: Hey, Taylor, you know where to find us, acquiredfm@gmail.com.

Ben: If you are looking to get more publicity, we're open.

David: Have Travis get in touch.

Ben: All right, let's do it. Welcome to this episode of Acquired, the podcast about great technology companies and the stories and playbooks behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.

David: I'm David Rosenthal.

Ben: And we are your hosts. This episode is a very unique one for David and I. Good friend of the show, Andrew Marks, organized a little dinner for us with Charlie Munger and a few other folks at Charlie's home in Los Angeles. You can hear Andrew a few times in the background asking Charlie questions. We are pretty sure that this is the only podcast that Charlie has ever done.

Charlie, aside from being one of the most prolific investors of all time alongside his partner Warren Buffett, is 99 years old. He will turn 100 on January 1st. Of course, our conversation was interesting because he's freaking Charlie Munger, but also because it was interesting to get the perspective of someone who has seen the last 99 years of human history.

We talked with Charlie, of course, about Costco, his history investing in retailers over the last 50 years. We also got to hear his views on what it takes to build a great partnership, what's gone wrong in the global securities markets these days, the concept of investing versus gambling, and where investment opportunities remain in the world today.

David: Ben, this was such a special life experience for you and me. You and me together to do this, and the fact that we got to record it and now share it with the world for posterity, just icing on the cake, and the whole thing was unbelievable.

Ben: Listeners, we knew we were going to have dinner. We were not sure whether we were going to be able to record it. Now we get to share it with all of you.

With that, join the Slack. There is an awesome discussion of every episode and the news of the day at acquired.fm/slack. If you sign up for acquired emails, you will get episode corrections and follow-up from previous episodes, plus hints at what the next episode will be, that's acquired.fm/email. We have only one sponsor for this interview.

David: A special conversation deserves a special sponsorship. Longtime listeners will know that there's only one company in the Acquired universe that is truly appropriate, because everything they do is modeled after Charlie and Warren, and that's Tiny.

Ben: Tiny is the Berkshire Hathaway of the Internet. Literally, they are such huge fans that they started a company that makes bronze busts of Buffett and Munger themselves, but more on that in a minute.

David: Berkshire, as we know, started as a textile mill in Massachusetts nearly 200 years ago. Almost 20 years ago, Tiny founders, Andrew Wilkinson and his partner Chris, took their version of an internet textile mill, the premier design agency MetaLab, which designed the UIs for Slack, Uber, Tinder, Headspace, Coinbase, and others. They asked themselves, what would Charlie and Warren do if they were us?

That led to the realization that just like Berkshire discovered in the physical world, the Internet also has wonderful niche businesses with great cash flows. In fact, they tend to be even better than the old days of See's Candies and Blue Chip Stamps because they require zero capital reinvestment, have software margins, and can build global brands much faster than the 50 some years it took See's to expand around the world.

Ben: Andrew and Chris took the extra cash flow from MetaLab and their other businesses, and created Tiny, the world's first and best permanent holding company for wonderful internet businesses, and boy did it work.

David: Fast forward to today, and thanks to Tiny's success, this opportunity is no longer a secret. Many people have caught on to the idea that this can really work. But just like Berkshire itself, no one else has the combination of experience, temperament, access to capital, and frankly, reputation that Andrew and Chris have built over the past two decades.

We're investors in Tiny ourselves alongside Bill Ackman and Howard Marks. Just like the two of them, Tiny is really the long-term buyer of choice in their niche. Anyone who's looking for a permanent home for their profitable internet business or who needs a capital partner for a co-founder or VC cap table buyout, would be lucky to work with Tiny.

Ben: For instance, they just bought the premier social network for film buffs, Letterboxd, which has been the founder's baby for 12 years and will stay so within Tiny. This really reflects Tiny's whole ethos—work with only the best internet businesses, commit to simple diligence 30 day deals, and leave the business alone, either for you to operate or bring in new long-term oriented management. Up to you.

David: Thanks to Tiny. This is the only sponsor, as Ben said, that you'll hear on this episode, and just like Berkshire, it'll be here in perpetuity. Tiny just became a public company earlier this year, and they can now do deals ranging anywhere from $1 million all the way up to $250 million. If you want to get in touch, just shoot them a note at hi@tiny.com and just tell them that Ben and David sent you.

Ben: Oh, and one more thing. The Bronze Charlie Busts, the perfect daily reminder in your workspace to ask what would Charlie do? Just head on over to berkshirenerds.store to buy your own. They also have plenty of some guy named Warren, too.

Okay, now without further ado, this is not investment advice. David and I may have investments in the companies we discuss, and this show is for informational and entertainment purposes only and on to Charlie Munger.

Ben: Charlie, I was watching the NFL games last weekend and it seems like every advertisement now is a sports betting advertisement. Is this good for America?

Charlie: No, of course not. Are the dog tracks, racetracks of America, the casinos, good for America? Of course not. They're just very popular.

David: That's how Warren got his start though, right? At the racetrack?

Charlie: But Warren never gambled. He was only a patron of them. Warren wants the odds in his favor, not somebody else. It's just so simple if you're Warren. You want to be the house, not the punter.

Ben: Listeners, the next topic that came up was retail stock trading and the idea that for many Americans, this is akin to gambling.

Charlie: It’s the way it's organized. They don't really know anything about the companies or anything. They just gamble on going up and down the price. If I were running the world, I would have a tax on short-term gains with no offset for losses on anything. I would just driving this whole crowd of people out of business.

Andrew: What do you think about the algorithms like Renaissance and stuff like that?

Charlie: Well, of course, Renaissance, the first algorithm was so simple. They sifted all this data for the past and what did they decide? Up, up, which were two closing prices, and down, down were more common than down, up, or up, down.

Once they realized that's the way it was for various reasons deeper than the psychology of man, man is a natural trend follower, he's been gambling short-term, and they just program the computers to automatically buy on one thing on the first up day and sell before the end of the second day. It did it day after day after day. Every day the central clearing agent would say, your check today is $8,500,000. Your check tomorrow is $9,400,000.

What happens is that the easiest trade is to front run, but you know what the average is that the index funds have to buy, and you know what it is exactly. They all know that. The way they get their returns year after year is by taking the leverage, that midday leverage, up higher and higher and higher and higher. They're making smaller and smaller profits off more and more volume, which gives them this big peak leverage risk, which I would not run myself. That's the only way they make these big returns, is to have this huge leverage. It would make you crazy if you were already rich.

Ben: I had the good fortune of speaking with someone you know well, Richard Galanti at Costco, and spending a few hours.

Charlie: He knows a lot about it. He's been there all his life.

Ben: It's crazy. It seems like that's everyone on the executive team.

David: They've all been there all their lives.

Charlie: Yeah, I know.

Ben: I'm curious, how did you first come across Costco or Price Club at the time?

Charlie: Rod Hills somehow knew Sol Price and knew what he was doing. He said, you have to go down and meet him. I drove down and went through his store and talked with Sol. Of course Sol was a very intelligent man. Sol was an ordinary lawyer until he was 39 years of age. Then he went out and formed a government employees discount company.

David: Was this in the Fedco days?

Charlie: He was no longer with Fedco. He sold Fedco to the Germans.

Ben: FedMart to Hugo Mann.

Charlie: Yeah.

Ben: Did you get to invest in Price Club before it merged with Costco?

Charlie: Yes, I did. But I just bought my stock from the market. I wasn't getting any favor from anybody.

Ben: How did you eventually meet Jim Sinegal?

Charlie: Sinegal asked Warren to become a director of Costco. He was looking for somebody with a financial reputation.

Ben: As an independent?

Charlie: Yes, and Warren wouldn't do it. He said, why don't you get Charlie to do it? I want shorter plane rides to director's meetings and so forth. That's how that happened.

Ben: Did Berkshire ever try to become a shareholder or acquire Costco?

Charlie: They tried to get Warren to buy out the French when they left (Carrefour) and Warren wouldn't do it. Warren doesn't like retailing.

David: Was it just that he doesn't like retail? Or what was the big objection?

Charlie: Practically everything that was once mighty in retail is gone. Sears Roebuck is gone, the big department stores are gone. It's just too damn difficult as far as he's concerned.

Andrew: You had a bad experience with Diversified retail, right?

Charlie: No, we made nothing but money that Diversified. We didn't exactly make it in retailing, but we made a lot of money.

Ben: Wow, and with Diversified, most of the money was not on the retailing operation. You made a lot of that money through…?

Charlie: What happened was very simple. We bought this little pissant department store chain in Baltimore. Big mistake. Too competitive. As the ink dried on the closing papers, we realized we made a terrible mistake. So we decided just to reverse it and take the hits to look foolish rather than go broke. He just told [name] get us out of this.

By that time we already financed half of it in covenant-free debt, and so forth. They had all this extra cash and our own stocks got down to selling enormous... we just, in the middle of one of those recessions, we just bought, bought, bought, and bought. All that money went right into those stocks. Of course, we tripled it just sitting on our ass.

Ben: That led to Blue Chip?

Charlie: Yeah, it was part of the early success of Blue Chip.

Ben: Wow. You mentioned Warren doesn't like retailers.

Charlie: Blue Chip did something else you both don’t know about. We bought a little pissant savings and loan company for maybe $20 million. When we left that thing, we had taken out of our little $20 million investment over $2 billion in marketable securities, which went into Nebraska insurance companies as part of their bedrock capital. We had some wonderful early years, and that's what everybody needs, those wonderful early years.

Ben: Wow.

David: In our Costco episode, we started with the joke. At one of the Berkshire meetings probably 10 years ago, Warren told the joke about you were on a plane being hijacked, and the hijackers gave you one final request, and you said you'd like to give your speech on the virtues.

Charlie: Warren got tired of me reminding him.

David: Yeah, and he said shoot me first. We were hoping you could give us your speech on the virtues of Costco.

Charlie: Warren was kidding me for being so repetitive on the subject. There aren't many times in a lifetime when you know you're right and you know you have one that's really going to work wonderfully. Maybe five or six times in a lifetime you get a chance to do it. People who do it two or three times early, all go broke because they think it's easy. In fact, it's very hard and rare.

Ben: What was it about Costco that made you realize this is one of those few moments in a lifetime?

Charlie: They really did sell cheaper than anybody else in America and they did it in big, efficient stores. The parking spaces were 10 feet wide instead of eight or nine feet or whatever they normally are. They did it all right and they had a lot of parking spaces. They kept out of their stores. All these people didn't do big volumes, and they gave special benefits to the people who did come to the stores in the way of reward points.

Ben: The executive membership?

Charlie: Yeah. It all worked.

Ben: The capital-light business model, I mean, when we were studying it, the difference between price—

Charlie: They have no investment in inventory. They make the suppliers wait until they've been paid and then they're scheduled to pay only after they're scheduled to sell.

Ben: They've got 900 warehouses around the world full of high-quality merchandise, none of which they have sitting on their books.

Charlie: That's correct.

David: Our understanding is that Price Club went public initially before the merger, they just listed. They didn't raise any capital. They didn't need any capital.

Charlie: Who knows?

Sol liked it. He was a financier. He liked deals. He liked this miscellaneous real estate. But that didn’t made sense! You got an enterprise as big as Costco, you don't want to screw around with your parking lot, get other people clog up your parking lot permanently and stuff. it's not going to pay you very much.

Ben: Right.

Charlie: You don't want them is the answer.

Ben: Have you ever seen another business that takes advantage of the virtue of the low SKU count the way that Costco does?

Charlie: There are lots of them. That little grocery store chain here in Los Angeles, Gelson Brothers. They wanted the high turnovers and low capital costs, and they never made the least effort to earn any money. They didn’t want to share their parking lot with anybody.

Ben: As you reflect back on one of these few great companies in a lifetime that you should bet big on, what advice would you have for David and I as young partners looking for a few of these in our lifetime? Things to look out for?

Charlie: You may find it five years after you bought it. These things may work into it or your own understanding may get better. But when you know you have an edge, you should bet heavily. When you know you're right. Most people don't teach that in business school. It's insane. Of course you got to bet heavily on your best bets.

Ben: How do you develop that level of conviction to know?

Charlie: You work at it. You do a lot of reading, thinking, and visiting.

David: I'm curious, we wanted to ask you, you've had this beautiful partnership with Warren for half a century, we're a decade into our partnership.

Charlie: There was a lot of low hanging fruit in the early days of our operation. You don't have any low hanging fruit that's easy to recognize.

Ben: You mean in investment opportunities?

Charlie: Yeah, that's right.

David: But your relationship with Warren?

Charlie: We were both somewhat similar. We both wanted to keep our families safe and take a good job for our investors and so on. We had similar attitudes.

David: Did it change over the decades?

Charlie: No. Warren still cares more about the safety of his Berkshire shareholders than he cares about anything else. If we used a little bit more leverage throughout, we'd have three times as much now, and it wouldn't have been that much more risk either. We never wanted to give them the least a chance of screwing up our basic shelter position.

Ben: If you had used more leverage, do you think there's some chance of that?

Charlie: We would have done a little better, sure.

Ben: Do you think there's some chance that it wouldn't exist at all? That it would have cost you the franchise?

Charlie: No, I think it would have worked fine.

David: Does Warren think that?

Charlie: If the situation lends itself to, if you were intelligent, just milking it out.

David: When you leverage, I'm so curious after we did our--

Charlie: It's automatically leveraged! If you open a new store with no capital, of course it's leveraged. Who wouldn't want a business with no inventories?

Ben: Right, that's a good point. By the virtue of you owe a whole bunch of people money on day one for these goods.

Charlie: Which turnover so rapidly.

David: Right. It's interesting, I mean, that leverage, it's not debt leverage. What do you think about debt?

Charlie: A lot of people do it now. A lot of people who manufacture something, they're just terribly strong and they're just forcing the suppliers to carry all the inventory. It isn't like we're the only ones that do it.

Ben: Back to the point on partnership, David and I are coming up on 10 years as partners in this podcast we do together. Different from the investing business, but a compounding one nonetheless. After a 50-year partnership with Warren, what advice would you have for us interpersonally to make for an enduring partnership?

Charlie: Well, it helps if you like one another and enjoy working together.

David: We do.

Charlie: Yeah, but I don't use any one formula. A lot of partnerships that work well for a long time happen because one's good at one thing and one's good at another. They just naturally divide it. Each one likes what he's doing.

Now in Costco's case, they had Jeff Brotman, who's very smart but not a retailer, and Jim Sinegal. They divided it up and they had originally agreed that Brotman would be the chairman and CEO because he founded the whole thing. But Sinegal decided, no, I have to be the CEO. It was a big unfortunate board meeting, a big internal struggle, and Brotman moved aside.

David: Was that after you joined the board?

Charlie: No, before.

David: Do you think you and Warren not living in the same city helped your partnership last so long?

Charlie: Well, it may have helped, but Warren has very close relations with all those people. They have lunch every Saturday at Berkshire headquarters. It isn't like he doesn't have a little quarter of people there who are pals from the ground up.

Ben: Do you think it helps that when you do spend the time together, it's special rather than being common?

Charlie: Of course we used to spend a lot of time together when we were young because we didn't have that much to do. Now we've got more to do but then it's just the other minutiae of life so it's different.

Ben: Yeah.

David: It's funny. I feel like we have a lot to do now.

Charlie: Of course, you do. It's very difficult to invest money well. I think it's all but impossible to do time after time after time in venture capital.

David: We really wanted to ask your thoughts on venture capital.

Charlie: Some of the deals get so hot and you have to decide so quickly. You're all just sort of gambling.

Ben: Do you think the role of venture capital is being properly accomplished in society?

Charlie: No, I think it's very poorly done.

David: Charlie elaborated on this point with a few things that we can't air, but the topic did turn to Bitcoin.

Ben: I've heard many comments you've made on Bitcoin. I'm curious if you have a thought on this particular angle. An easy way to transfer money between countries, especially when those countries don't have a stable store of value within that country. Is it good to have an independent store of value that is not pegged to a nation state?

Charlie: Of course, it's good to the world as a whole to have a way of having some currency. The way that was solved is for a long time, the British pound was the national currency of the investment world. Then it shifted to the dollar, and it's still a dollar. People like China have these enormous reserves of dollars, the money we make. Think of the money people give us where we always just print up these pieces of paper.

Ben: What about the common person in some of these less fortunate countries who don't have access to US dollars?

Charlie: Oh, they do if they ever get any money. The dollar is very fungible, you can always buy one anywhere.

Ben: I'm curious, back to this point of the role of venture capital in a society, if you could design a perfect system to fund innovation.

Charlie: I think it's a very legitimate business if you do it right, if you want to give the right people the power, nurture them, and help them. You know a lot about the tricks of the game, so you can help them run their business, yet not interfere with them so much they hate you.

By and large, having bumped into a lot of people in the businesses with venture capital financing, I would say the ordinary rule is that people in the business doing the work, more often than not they hate the venture capitalists. They don't feel they are a partner trying to help the company, they’re taking care of themselves and so on and so on. They don't like them.

Ben: How could it work differently?

Charlie: That’s not true at Berkshire. Our people know we're not trying to discard them to the highest bid. See if some investment banker offers us 20 times earnings or some lousy business, we don't sell. If it's a problem in a business we've never been able to fix, we'll sell it. But if it's a halfway decent business, we never sell anything. That gives us this reputation of staying with things, which helps us.

Ben: Do you think that buy and hold, not only mentality, but demonstration is the key thing that aligns investors with managers?

Charlie: Well, it's rare, you see. Everybody else has a standard way of doing things and the lawyers have their standard forms. Everybody just has the same standard form and they get the same standard results subject to the vicissitudes of investment life. You don't want to make money by screwing your investors and that's what a lot of venture capitals do.

The world is full of ex-Goldman Sachs partners that formed a private fund and they manage a billion dollars or something like that. They charge two points off the top, plus the […] and that enables them to make very handsome living for themselves, but the endowments are not getting a good return.

David: Do you think it's specifically the fee aspect of fund structures?

Charlie: It's just the nature of the wedges, it's the way it works. Of course, you really shouldn't be in the business of charging extra unless you really are going to achieve very unusual results. Of course, it's easier to pretend that you can get good results than it is to actually get them.

It attracts the wrong people. People with investment capital turn up mine and the people who make the most money out of venture capital are a lot like investment bankers deciding which hot new area they're going to get in. They're not great investors or great at anything.

David: What do you think endowments and large pools of capital should do then?

Charlie: Well, they're starting to do it. The endowments have started to say to all these people that charge 3 and 30 or whatever they charge. They said, we'll pay you 3 and 30. We're going to put in twice as much money. Then the next half, you'll get nothing on it. We're just going to ride pari passu on some of your investments.

The fees go down by 50%, that'll take a lot of the fun out of it. Fees down 50% and that's happening all over America. They feel had, misled, and irritated. They've looked foolish to their own trustees.

David: One of the issues I think in investing right now, you mentioned it about venture capital, but I think it's true everywhere, is that there's just so much capital and so much competition. We're so far removed from the cigar bud era. We're in the opposite of the cigar bud era these days. Are there opportunities out there?

Charlie: Somebody will find a few things, but it gets harder and harder. I would argue one of the easiest ones was when they decided on a little group around Home Depot. They would copy the Costco model and home improvements and that was basically a good idea. Think of the money they made doing it.

David: Yeah, Bernie Marcus.

Charlie: Yeah. That was a direct copy of Costco.

Ben: Do you think there are more opportunities to copy Costco?

Charlie: Well, there was another one at Costco. Floor & Decor is the current imitator. It's in wood imitating vinyl flooring. They're running a Costco model and they keep adding miscellaneous stuff to it too.

Ben: It's the miscellaneous stuff that'll eventually kill you, though.

Charlie: Well, it'll be simpler if it was all floor.

David: Home Depot worked so well, but I don't know that it was totally obvious. Part of the appeal of Costco was it was horizontal. It was everything. Consumers could come. They could make a trip, bring their big wagon, and bring their big truck.

Charlie: Home Depot was the same. They copied everything.

David: And famously Bernie Marcus came out to visit Sol before he started.

Charlie: Yeah, he copied everything.

David: Sol was happy to share the playbook with everybody. How do you feel about that?

Charlie: Sol was another crazy person. He was domineering and so on, but he was also very intelligent. But there aren't many opportunities like Home Depot and Costco. There aren't very many.

Ben: Why do you think Walmart hasn't been successful once they saw Costco in competing?

Charlie: They were too weathered by the ideas they already had. That’s everybody’s trouble. They just can’t accept a new idea because the space is occupied by the old idea. They got into the habit of getting real estate for practically nothing, because they went into towns where nothing is valuable. So their occupancy cost are like zero. And they knew how to make big efficient stores. That was their formula.

So it offended them to go against the rich suburbs and having to pay for the good locations. Costco just specializes in the good locations, where the rich people lived. And Walmart just let them do it year after year. It was just a terrible mistake.

David: Did you know Sam Walton?

Charlie: No, never met him. I knew one of the sons. They divided it up about six parts very early.

David: Yeah, Walton Enterprise.

Charlie: They never paid much gift tax.

Ben: The topic then turned into the automakers and the future of the car industry.

Charlie: How hard would it be to go into the auto business, to have some big killing? Who's going to win? Who knows? The whole thing has been thrown way up in the air by all these electric cars, all these big, new capital requirements, different ways of selling cars. Plus they got these tough unions. See I just don’t even look at the auto industry!

Ben: Do you think it's more investible today than it was 50 years ago because of the disruptive innovation of electric?

Charlie: Well maybe for one or two electric cars that are really good, maybe, but certainly nobody else. It's too tough. BYD was a miracle. That guy worked 70 hours a week and has a very high IQ. He can do the things you can't do. You can look at somebody else's auto part and you can figure out how to make the goddamned thing. You can't do that, you see.

Person: Charlie, you invest in a Hyundai.

Charlie: Yes, but they're clever too.

Person: How was that investment for you?

Charlie: I lost money, not much because I was stubborn, I held out until I got back to almost what I paid for when I sold.

Andrew: There's been a lot of discussion about Berkshire's investments in the Japanese trading houses.

Charlie: That is a no-brainer. Something like that, if you're as smart as Warren Buffett, maybe two to three times the century, you had an idea like that. The interest rates in Japan were half a percent per year for 10 years. These trading companies were really entrenched old companies. They had all these cheap copper mines and rubber plantations.

You could borrow for ten years ahead. Probably about a year you could buy the stocks and it's likely at 5% dividends. A huge flow of cash with no investment, no thought, no anything. How often do you do that? You'll be lucky if you get one or two a century. We could do that, nobody else could.

It looked attractive for half a percent, but you couldn't get it. But Berkshire with its credit could, and the only way you could get it was be very patient, just pick away little pieces of the time. It took him forever to get $10 billion invested. It was like God just opening a chest and just pouring money. It's awfully easy money.

Ben: It's interesting that it's paradoxical. You need Berkshire's credit. But at Berkshire scale, it's actually hard to put enough money to work.

Charlie: That's true, but why shouldn’t it be hard to make money? Why should it be easy?

David: Japanese trading companies remind me. We studied another company recently, Nike. That is surprising to me. Have you ever looked at it?

Charlie: That's a very different company. That's a style company. Of course, I've looked at it, but I don't like style companies.

Ben: Too fad-driven?

Charlie: I suppose if you offered me Hermes at a cheap enough price, and I'd buy it. But short of that, I’m not going to buy any style company

Ben: That's a good pick.

Andrew: To the style point, another one that they covered was LVMH. What Arnault has done has been amazing. What do you make of that company?

Charlie: Well, if you're as good as they are at what they've done, you have a lifetime to do it in. Without a lifetime, three or four lifetimes to do it in. You can create another, but it's not easy.

David: Hermes is on the eighth generation, I think, now of the family running it.

Charlie: It's not a bit easy. They have meetings every day and make policy decisions, and they choose the locations one at a time. It's work.

Ben: It's definitely work. What do you think the durable value is in these, as you say, style companies, of the very best one in the world, the Hermes or the LVMH? What makes them enduring?

Charlie: They just got a brand people trust so much. It took them a century to do it.

Ben: Our conversation then turned to comparing Kirkland Signature as a brand to Hermes.

Charlie: Kirkland is a brand the way Tide is a brand. And Hermes is a… different kind of a brand.

Ben: Yeah, Ferrari doesn't make detergent.

Charlie: No.

David: We've spent a lot of time studying these brands. How do you look at the value of a brand?

Charlie: It's hard for us not to love brands, since we were lucky enough to buy See’s candy for $20 million as our first acquisition. We found out fairly quickly that we could raise the price every year 10%, and nobody cared. We didn't make the volumes go up or anything like that. Just made the profits go up. We've been raising the price by 10% a year for all these 40 years or so. It's been a very satisfactory company.

It didn't require any new capital. That’s what was good about it: very little new capital. It had two big kitchens and a bunch of rental stores when we bought it, and now it's got two big kitchens and a bunch of rental stores.

Charlie See was a playboy, and his brother ran the company, his older brother, and dominated it completely. And when he died, Charlie made his brother as executor, and now he needs a lot of money to pay death taxes. He doesn't have it. It's due eight months or something later. They really wanted to sell it so they can pay the death taxes. See, it was only making $4 million pre tax when we bought it.

Ben: So that buying opportunity only came about because the family needed liquidity to pay the death taxes?

Charlie: Yes, that's right. We only found out about it because Charlie See was on this cruise to Hawaii or something with this guy who was a client… the investment council also worked for Blue Chip Stamps, which is the company that bought it. Anyway, that's how we found out about it. We paid that guy a finder's fee even, we've never paid one since.

Andrew: It was worth it!

Charlie: Of course, but you don't want a bad reputation for paying a finder's fee. Everybody in the world will be bothering you all day long.

Andrew: So, there are categories like See’s or Hermes, where brands lead to pricing power….

Charlie: I think your chances of buying one of them are so low, I wouldn't even look. I only believe in looking at things that I might find. You're not going to get a chance to buy them.

Ben: No curiosity without a return!

Andrew: Why do you think there are extremely well-known brands in other categories, maybe packaged food or something?

Charlie: There are a lot of professional investors who buy nothing but branded goods. They usually start with this Nestle, and […]. They’ve done two or three points better than average, but it's not a bonanza.

David: After that, our conversation turned to Kraft Heinz and why Heinz is able to have pricing power while Kraft is not.

Charlie: It is very interesting. There’s something about the flavor of ketchup on a goddamned fried potato… that you are really willing to change brands over. They want Heinz! And so, you can raise the price of Heinz pretty much. If you try and raise the price of Kraft cheese, everybody’s goes into rebellion, including the final customer, the housewife. They don't care that much about whether cheese is Kraft or not.

Ben: Why do you think that is?

Charlie: Something about the sauce flavor. It’s happened elsewhere. In Korea, one guy, a Chinese guy, controls all the sauces. Every single major sauce, he controls at least 95% of them.

Ben: And it's because sauces have such a particular flavor that no one can imitate the trade secret?

Charlie: Yeah.

Ben: And that gives pricing power?

Charlie: They get used to it, and they like it.

Person: Is that Coca-Cola as well?

Charlie: Yeah, sure.

Ben: Charlie, I'm curious. At age 99, what is something that you believe today that 70-year-old Charlie would have disagreed with?

Charlie: I knew when I was 70 that it was hard. It's just so hard. I know how hard it is now. Always, people who are getting this 2 and 20, or 3 and 30, or whatever, they all talk because oh, it was easy. And they get to believing their own bullshit. And of course, it's not very easy. It's very hard.

David: If you were back 30 or 40 years old again today, would you decide to go into the investment business again?

Charlie: Well, probably because it suits my nature. But I didn't really enjoy the 3 and 30 business. Once I had enough money on my own, I'd rather just operate with my own money. That is a much better way of doing it than being forced to sell, being forced to deal with investment bankers, being forced to deal with investment consultants, being forced to deal with venture capital. To hell with them. Who wants it? You don't need other people. The point of getting rich is so you don't have to need other people, so you don’t have to get along with other people.

Person: Charlie, if you started with Warren today and you were both 30 years old, do you think you guys would build anything close to what Berkshire is today?

Charlie: The answer to that is no, we wouldn’t. We had… everybody that had unusually good results… almost everything has three things: They're very intelligent, they worked very hard, and they were very lucky. It takes all threeto get them on this list of the super successful. How can you arrange to have just […] good luck? The answer is you can start early and keep trying for a long time, and maybe you'll get one or two.

Andrew: If you were starting again today, do you think insurance would still be the vehicle?

Charlie: It depends on your temperament! Insurance would be ideal for a certain kind of a temperament. It takes a very patient person to get rich in insurance. It takes forever to get anything, and it takes forever to push anybody aside. It's very hard to make money.

Ben: I've heard you say, as soon as you're wealthy enough to self-insure, you should.

Charlie: That's [the answer for] practically everything. Think of all the crumbums of the world that drink too much and file a claim to the insurance company, gets on fire or something. Why would you want to pay for your share of their stupidity?

Ben: Not to mention the overhead. Of course, the insurance company needs to pay all the people that work there.

Charlie: Yeah. It's crazy.

Ben: Is there any insurance that you carry today?

Charlie: I carry no fire insurance anywhere.

Ben: Do you carry auto insurance?

Charlie: Yeah, I have to.

Ben: I don't know, Charlie could…

Charlie: No, I have to and I do.

Andrew: Since these guys are very tech-focused, I'm curious about not being a tech person. What did you think about the Apple investment? And what gave you the conviction to be so big?

Charlie: What everybody has learned is that everybody needs some significant participation in the 12 companies that do better than everybody else. You need two or three of them, at least. If you have that mindset, Apple was the logical candidate to be on the list of which you’re going to select your companies. It's not very hard to come up with an idea that it may be okay.

Ben: Making the list doesn't sound too hard. In fact, there are these acronyms FAANG, MAAMA, Microsoft, Apple, Google, Facebook, but selecting the one and putting tens of billions to create hundreds of billions of value… that to me sounds hard to pick the one! How did you guys pick the one?

Charlie: We're good at anything else.

David: Was it valuation?

Charlie: Yeah, it got cheap. It got to about 10 times earnings when Warren bought in.

Ben: 2015, I believe, was the first.

It's fascinating to me, this concept of if you look at distressed debt, or you look at (I think) Warren in the last Berkshire letter pointed out, it's been a handful of really good decisions…. Or you look at venture capital that's classically power law–distributed. Any of these asset classes comes down to a few really good decisions with high conviction over an entire career.

Charlie: Yeah, that's exactly what worked.

Ben: It's not smoothed. There's no asset class where you can repeatedly just do okay.

Charlie: The low-hanging fruit for the idiot is… it’s not gone, but it's very small.

Ben: You mentioned this idea when we were talking about Apple, that there are a few companies that it's just really important to be in. Do you think these big tech companies being the winners, where all of the pensions, Berkshire, university endowments, and everyone's 401(k) is being concentrated in these companies, do you think that was the natural outcome? Do we have to end up this way?

Charlie: Yeah, it was natural. That's why it happened.

Ben: What causes that?

Charlie: Human nature and competition, that's what causes it.

Ben: Will we eventually have one?

Charlie: Eventually, this craziness in venture capital, when they’re all gone stupid, that's a natural outcome.

Ben: Will we have one $20 trillion company and then the next biggest company is—?

Charlie: I don’t know how the world is gonna. I think… I didn’t know we were gonna have as much as we did. They just happened.

Person: Would you continue investing in China? What's your position on that?

Charlie: My position in China has been that: (1) the Chinese economy has better future prospects over the next 20 years than almost any other big economy. That’s number one. (2) The leading companies of China are stronger and better than practically any other leading companies anywhere, and they're available at a much cheaper price.

So naturally, I'm willing to have some China risk in the Munger portfolio. How much China risk? Well that's not a scientific subject, but I don't mind whatever it is, 18% or something. Whatever its worked out in the Munger family, it's okay with me.

Ben: What about other geopolitical considerations? Would you hold TSMC at this point?

Charlie: Well I don't like that as well as I like something with a real consumer brand of its own like Apple.

Andrew: I'm curious, what major companies that haven't been mentioned do you think people would do well to study the virtues of, like studying the virtues of Costco?

Charlie: I only study two kinds of companies. I'm enough of a big Ben Graham follower… so if something is really cheap, even though it's a crappy company, I'm willing to consider buying it. For a while anyway. I do that occasionally. I've done it with great success of time or two, but unlike Howard Marks I’ve only done it once or twice in my lifetime for big gains, and that's it. It's not like I’ve done it a hundred times. It isn't a bit easy. A hundred times easy money is almost non-existent.

David: One type of company is the cigar butt. What's the other type of company?

Andrew: The companies that people would do well to study the virtues of?

Charlie: Great brand companies, of course, are good. Getting the right price… the whole trick is getting them on a few rare occasions when they're really cheap. Buying Costco at its present price… it may work out all right but that’s… but again it's getting hard.

Andrew: Forgetting the prospects of the stock, how do you think about the next 10 years for the business?

Charlie: I think it’ll do pretty well.

Ben: Charlie, one more question for you in this area. What is your favorite advice to give to young people?

Charlie: I don't give advice to just any young people. I give some, I pick my spots. I don't want to be more of a guru to young people than I already am. It's getting hard out there. There's all this bullshit and craziness. Of course, it's going to be hard.

Ben: Where do the attractive opportunities hang out anymore? It sounds like everything in the whole world is overpriced. Could that be possible?

Charlie: Damn near. Of course, it could be possible. It's not only possible, it's likely that it actually happened.

Ben: How did the world get so rich if we have all this capital for so few opportunities?

Charlie: It's the nature of things. Look, biology produces a very advanced creature like us, consider I can talk intelligently on all these objects. But it does it by killing everybody off with brutal competition one with the other for… hundreds of thousands of years. In other words, the system that nature uses to get smart is kind of unpleasant for the people who are losing.

Ben: So over the last 100 years, we've brutally shifted all this value from labor to capital, and now capital is all competing to get into a very small set of opportunities?

Charlie: It wasn’t as if it was all that easy if you go back a long time. It just was a lot easier.

Ben: And if it continues to get harder, the natural end is that you have...

Charlie: An unpleasant blow up or some kind. God knows what happens after an unpleasant blow up with our modern democracy. You get to a level like Europe which is quite dysfunctional.

Ben: Is it too pessimistic of a view to say that the world seems to be out of good ideas to match the amount of capital out there looking for good ideas?

Charlie: It was never easy. It's thoroughly understood it was never easy, and it's harder now. Those are the two. But it takes time. And you pay attention that you're handling the people you deal with. You want a good reputation when you're all done, not a bad one.

Andrew: I don't think you're saying there are no opportunities whatsoever. I think you're just saying low expectations and fewer bonanzas.

Charlie: The beauty of it is: you only have to get rich once. You don't have to climb this mountain four times. You just have to do it once.

Andrew: Well that’s your philosophy on both sides, you got to be patient for the great opportunities. But you got to recognize them when they come and pounce.

David: We turned off the mics to have dinner and then recorded a little bit more later in the evening about Costco and some life advice from Charlie.

Ben: One Costco question that I've been wanting to ask you is: all the puzzle pieces of the low SKU count, the high inventory turnover… there are just so many things that fit together so beautifully…

Charlie: They're pretty obvious, though.

Ben: But how come no one else can pull it off if they're so obvious?

Charlie: Well, it takes a good execution to do it. You really have to set out to do it, and then do it with fanaticism, every day, every week, every year for 40 years. It's not so damn easy.

Ben: So you think the success is the magic of the business model and culture?

Charlie: Yes, culture plus model. Yes, absolutely. And very reliable, hard working, determined execution for 40 years.

David: I mean, they talk about the story of the ketchup that you could increase the price of ketchup by 3% and nobody would notice, but that would destroy everything if you did that, right?

Charlie: I would say the central norm was: don't raise the market. Get it low and keep it there forever.

David: Which brings us to the hotdogs. Is it true, the story that when Craig took over as CEO, he did try to raise the price of the hotdogs?

Charlie: I don't know. I had no conversations on thesubject.

David: And Jim forbade him.

Charlie: I'm sure Jim would have forbade it, absolutely.

David: There was no board-level discussion of the hotdog?

Charlie: No. Those two would not have thought it was a board matter to discuss the price of the hotdog.

Ben: One thing that fascinates me about Costco is they seem to only be able to grow 10% per year, because they're not capital-constrained. No amount of money, if they were to access it for free, could—

Charlie: I’ll tell you what is. It's hard to open too many stores a year. New store, new manager, new this, new politics. It's hard, plus a lot of stuff has to be learned, taught, and put in place. They didn't want to do more than they can comfortably handle.

David: To the store openings, you mentioned China earlier. Was it 20 years that Costco had the license to operate in China?

Charlie: The first store, they tried to open in China. The first store, somebody wanted a $30,000 bribe. Chinese culture. And they just wouldn’t pay it. That made such a bad impression on Jim Sinegal. He wouldn't even talk about going into China for about 30 years thereafter.

David: So what changed? Why finally go in?

Charlie: Finally, the board started making enough noises.

David: You started agitating?

Charlie: Yeah.

Ben: Who on the board could be excited about the Chinese market…?

Charlie: Yeah. Who knows?

David: That’s so great.

Ben: One thing I found fascinating about Costco was the fact that even though they're at the lowest possible prices, their audience skews is wealthy. Was that an accident that they figured out over time, or did they know that?

Charlie: No, Sol Price did. They had that figured out […].

Ben: All the way back in the Price Club days?

Charlie: Yes. He always wanted the rich man trying to save money.

David: It's not just that they're the wealthiest customers, they're smart wealthy customers.

Charlie: They're picky.

David: Yeah, they're picky wealthy customers.

Ben: On some topics that are outside of Costco, you mentioned in The Daily Journal annual meeting this year that a young man knows the rules, and an old man knows the exceptions.

Charlie: Yeah, that's an old saying of Peter's.

Ben: Was that of Peter Kaufman?

Charlie: Yeah.

Ben: What are some of the exceptions that you found the most useful in life?

Charlie: Take those goddamned Costco hotdogs. That's an exception. Anybody else would have raised the price of hotdogs a long time ago. They just don't do it. You know how famous it is. You bring your kids, and they know they've got something going there that's worth extra money to them, and they just don’t destroy it.

Ben: A thing that I've never fully understood: I know you're a big fan of the company, BYD, the Chinese company that makes batteries and electric vehicles.

Charlie: I may be a big fan, but I'm hanging out my hat while I lurch around the track. They make me nervous. Just soaggressive.

Ben: Is that dangerous in a company?

Charlie: That's what makes me nervous. Of course it's dangerous.

Ben: Do you think that companies should try to grow at a lower rate than they're capable of in order to be more durable?

Charlie: Of course you do that safer, and its easier, and so forth. But I would argue at Costco, where they've done some of these things that are extreme like the hotdog, it's smart to change their ways on one item or two.

Ben: It seems like there's a spectrum where on the one side there's Costco that is just not a fast-growing company, because it's very difficult to. On BYD, like you're saying, they grew like crazy! I mean, you turned--

Charlie: Well BYD, this year will sell at least two and a half million cars. Most of them are electric, that's unheard of. That's way more than Mercedes, for instance.

David: More than Tesla, right?

Charlie: Yeah, more than anybody. Lots of troubles and losses. They ran into terrible trouble. They created the wrong kind… they made lots of mistakes. They were lucky to be on the cutting edge of this electric car business. It's way more acceleration than most people.

So you have a car with more oomf than most people need. So the young macho male has a real lively car. There are a lot of things, where electric cars really work in some ways that are better! At making a 90-degree turn. You can go right opposite a parallel parking space, you just move the wheels, it turns the wheels 90 degrees and goes in. Nobody's ever done that. If your car goes flat, you could run a hundred miles on three other wheels or soemthing.

Andrew: Do they have better economics, because they don't have nearly as many parts?

Charlie: It's simpler.

Ben: Have you ever had an investment like that before? I think you've invested something like $270 million that's now worth something like $8 billion in BYD.

Charlie: Well, very few people have an investment […]. That's a venture capital–type investment. It happened to be a thinly-traded public company, and we bought it as a venture capital–type company. But it was a venture capital–type play, and they just put the foot right in the floorboard and played it hard.

By the way, both BYD and we tried to talk them out of going into the car business. They were gonna buy a bankrupt car business, and go into the car business. I said that's a graveyard for you, so why would you want to do that? And he paid no attention to us and went right ahead.

Ben: Had you invested already when he told you this plan?

Charlie: Yes, yes. And it worked fabulously well. After huge mistakes! They almost went broke with their early dealership building system, almost went broke.

David: What captivated you about it though?

Charlie: The guy was a genius. He had a PhD in engineering, and he look at some great part… [he could make that park look at the morning and look at it. I didn't know he could make it.] I've never seen anybody like that. He could do anything.

He is a natural engineer and a get-it-done type production executive, and that's a big thing. It's a big lot of talent to happen in one place. It's very useful. He solved all his problems on these electric cars, the motors, the acceleration, the braking, and so on.

David: How would you compare him and BYD to Elon and Tesla?

Charlie: He's a fanatic that knows how to actually make things with his hands if he has to. He's closer to ground zero, in other words. The guy at BYD is better at actually making things than Elon is.

Ben: Charlie, you turn 100, which is an unbelievable statement on January 1st of next year. Do you have any plans?

Charlie: I'm going to party.

David: Where's the party going to be?

Charlie: The California Club. But I've totally maxed out the room, I can’t squeeze another.

Ben: What captivates you these days? What's fun?

Charlie: Well practically, everything is. Even politics, as bad as it is, it's kind of interesting.

David: When you look back at you and Warren's time together, when did you have the most fun?

Charlie: We had about the same amount of fun all the way through. We're having fun now.

Ben: Is there a particular era that you remember the most fondly that feels like the good old days?

Charlie: Well remember we were sweating blood on some of those good old days.

Ben: I mean, Salomon Brothers.

Charlie: Yeah, there were a lot of close misses. We got out with a big problem, but we could have had a big loss.

David: You could have had more problems than just a loss with Salomon, right?

Charlie: Yeah.

Ben: Actually, when we examined Berkshire Hathaway on our podcast, our takeaway was that the whole franchise was at risk during Salomon Brothers, the entire Berkshire Hathaway name and future. Would you agree with that?

Charlie: Not so much. We could have survived it.

Ben: If you would let the whole investment in Salomon go to zero, it would have been fine?

Charlie: If it all blown up and went to zero, we would have written it off and gone on. And done pretty well.

David: What do you consider to be your finest hour?

Charlie: Well, we like to remember the close misses that were nearly terrible problems. We had terrible problem with The Buffalo News.

Ben: The Buffalo News / Buffalo Evening News brawl?

Charlie: Yeah. There were two newspapers in that town. We started a Sunday edition. That started a holy war, and the other guy went broke. We could have had a lot of bad publicity over that.

Ben: You were both pretty young and enterprising at that point. You weren't the Warren and Charlie of...

Charlie: No. But I was very aggressive about wanting to have a good Sunday edition. I didn’t want to own the paper for 50 years with no Sunday editions and the other guy had one.

Ben: What made the newspaper business so attractive at that point in history?

Charlie: It was a gold mine at that time, total gold mine.

Ben: That's attractive.

David: The play in particular with The Buffalo Evening News and the Sunday edition was playing for the local monopoly to be the game in town. With newspapers, you could do that.

Charlie: Sure.

David: Newspapers, for decades, had EBITDA margins in the 50%–60% range, right?

Charlie: No, only the little ones.

David: Only the little ones?

Charlie: Yeah, the big ones are less, 30%, 40%, or 25%.

David: I said EBITDA on your presence, I apologize. Cash flow margins.

Ben: Actually, do you still feel that EBITDA is criminal the way that you've demonized it in the past?

Charlie: Yeah, I do. You've got a big truck company and take the depreciation out of the truck’s earnings. You’re lying about the earnings.

Ben: You witnessed its rise with Malone, TCI, and Liberty when EBITDA was invented as a concept. What were you thinking?

Charlie: I've never liked John Malone's extreme manipulations. I don't want to be known as the great manipulator like John Malone is. He paid less income taxes than anybody. He just pushed everything to the ideological extreme.

Ben: In many ways, EBITDA was the community adjusted earnings of its era. Are you familiar with the community adjustment from WeWork?

Charlie: No.

David: Final question to wrap up. What is the set of companies that you think are the greatest that you've ever seen, either that you've owned or that you've not owned?

Charlie: There are a lot of great companies. Hermes is a great company. In its heyday, General Motors was a great company. It just gradually went to hell one contract at the time.

Andrew: What do you think about the predictability of… there were a number of companies back when you started where you could have said this business will be the same in 10 years? Do you think that number is the same today, or do you think it's much higher than that?

Charlie: I think most places have a lot of change and threat in their future.

Ben: Do you think most places had a lot of change and threat in their future even 50 years ago, and this story is over-blown?

Charlie: There’s a difference with some of what I call a specialized industrial company, and Berkshire has a lot of them. We have a lot of companies that are quite insulated from really tough competition, just because they've been so long, and they’re so good at what they do and have a good reputation, high value, and so on.

Andrew: What companies can you see today where you can confidently say, Berkshire aside, Costco aside, you can confidently say the business will be as good as it is today in 10 years?

Charlie: I think a lot of companies are pretty good, but you can't confidently say what's going to happen. Because you may get some guy like Iger in that just wants to push everything and do the right public relations. So no matter how good the business is, it will be phony.

Ben: Charlie, I have a personal question for you. David has a two-year-old, and I'm going to have my first child in a month. What advice do you have for us about building families?

Charlie: Of course, you’ve got to get along with everybody. You got to help them through their tough times, and they help you, and so forth. But I think it’s not as hard. Half of the marriages in America work pretty damn well. And they would have worked just as well if they were both married to somebody else, by the way.

David: You've said that the best way to have a great spouse is to deserve one. As long as both parties feel that way, then it's a recipe for success.

Charlie: Of course it is. You got to have trust with your spouse on things like education of the children and so forth.

Benn: I love that. Charlie, thank you.

David: Thank you, Charlie.

Charlie: Good luck to you.

Andrew: A lot of people are going to benefit a lot from hearing this, and your wisdom, and they're going to learn so much.

Charlie: Well you know if you stop and think about it, it's pretty hard. It doesn't look so damn easy just to go out... if you go to the ordinary person trying to promote himself as an investment advisor of some kind, he just thinks he knows everything about everything and how the Federal Reserve should be run and so on. We don't feel that way.

David: I will say with the people we get to talk to you who've built great things, every single one of them says it was so hard. It's so hard, and you can't build something great without it being so hard.

Ben: Charlie, thanks so much for doing this with us.

Charlie: I'm glad to do it. It'll be an interesting life. You'll do pretty well at it, but it's not going to be that damn easy.

Ben: David, total life experience and complete boondoggle.

David: I can't believe we got to do this. I'm still pinching myself. It's now a couple of weeks after it actually happened.

Ben: I know, with autographed copies of Poor Charlie's Almanack to prove it.

David: As if the podcast wasn't enough. Actually, for those of you who haven't listened back in 2021, two-ish years ago, we did a whole three-part series, just us, covering the whole history of Berkshire Hathaway. Part one is on Warren, part two is on Charlie, part three is on Berkshire and Ted and Todd all the way up through to today. I assume many of you have listened to that, but there probably are a bunch of folks who haven't. If you want another 9 or 10 hours of Acquired content on Berkshire—I really think it's some of, if not our best work—go check those out.

Ben: With that, listeners, our huge thank you to Tiny for being the sole presenting sponsor of this episode. If you have, or you know of a wonderful internet business, you should reach out, hi@tiny.com. Just tell them that Ben, David, and Charlie sent you.

You can sign up for notifications of new emails every time an episode drops. We'll be including little tidbits as we learn things after releasing episodes—corrections, updates, things like that—and teasing the next episode, acquire.fm/email.

Listen to ACQ2. This is typically where we talk about more up-and-coming companies who are earlier in their journeys, or CEOs who are topic experts in important areas like AI. Search ACQ2 in any podcast player.

After you finish this, join the Slack, acquired.fm/slack and discuss with the whole Acquired community. If you want to get some of that sweet Acquired merch that everyone's talking about, go to acquired.fm/store. With that, listeners, we'll see you next time.

David: We'll see you next time.